Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	I have given you the completion of this book, which is the science of medicine, in praise of the physician who made it, and through his examples, and his statements, I see that you comprehend this well to yourselves in this treatise, which is a part of the operation which I call surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The first source sentence translates to: "However, the operation is performed on our territory and in our time with complete privacy, as soon as I deemed it necessary due to the science of the matter and the witness of it being left; and I did not want to describe it in any way in the books of the ancients, which would have been too long for the sense of the matter and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	It is observed to me that you are alive in this order of this treatise on the second way of exposure and declaration, and for the reason that it comes in the forms of the tools of cauterization and of other instruments of the work as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of it, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause for which the artificer is not able to make the arm as it should be in that time, is that the art of medicine is long and that the actor does not know this to be exercised in the science of anatomy which Guillaume entered after knowing the properties of the members and their shapes, and the connection and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their kind; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the locations of the inflammation of the same.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	For that reason, Iocaras says that he is named with a small book, but mainly in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have not yet said anything about that in the beginning of this book; for what we have said about anatomy is not known to many, and if it is not well done, many men die because of it, as you have seen many of them, who are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You saw a surgeon fold his hand and had experienced an abscess in the chest of a woman, and had incised some arteries of the chest so that great blood flowed out when the woman died between the shoulders of him.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	When another physician saw that the patient was suffering from a stone in the bladder, which had been processed in his state, and the stone was large, and it came out of the patient and was squeezed on the other side of the water, so that that man died the next day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you had called for help to remove that, and you saw that because of the large size of the stone and the position of the thighs under him that would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a black cradle which was made for the fracture in the thigh; and the physician, being ignorant, treated the fracture, over the plague, with pulvinars and estellas, and did not let the plague escape.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And it follows the rules of the doctors, and the relief, and the relief according to the number of days and commands that we unwind the limb; and I saw that the thigh and the foot were forged, and it came out in loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	When you called for me and appeared, I quickly undressed you and managed to achieve calm and ease in alleviating your pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, I already confirmed that the corruption had spread to the member, so I could not stop it and had to continue spreading the corruption throughout the thigh pericardium.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	I saw another doctor who performed an abscess on the cancer patient, and it ulcerated after a few days, because the malice of the lord of the body was revealed.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this pain is that the cramp is caused by melancholic humor, and it does not matter if it has been infused into the lord of the body, but rather that the member which suffers has been harmed by all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	Therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be performed in two stages: one is in the operation associated with health, and the other is in the work that is held in the larger dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in this free place where the operation was performed in which error and fear were committed; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard that and lay that aside, so that the children do not fall into speaking and with you being unjust.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	When you prepare your weapons for the concern and protection of God, and your patients for their necessity and closure.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	When you use the best way through the grace of God, they are saved and praised by the succession, and you heal the most difficult diseases, and you keep your weapons ready for what frightens you, so that your faith and your name do not abandon you: four more remain in your glory, and put on earth and in others' sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Guilt has already been confessed in some of my mistakes.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not medicate diseased patients, for if the bad ones do not rest.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And you have already had to write this free book three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the free book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered within the head of the foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the forces of the cauteries, and so that it is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second source sentence to translate:
Divisio de la tersa partida.	This sentence seems to be discussing the division of a certain part. Here's a possible translation: "Division of the
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	This sentence appears to be discussing the division of the third part, which is related to restoration and displacement, as well as the treatment of twisted and semblant parts. Here's a possible translation: "The third part, which is ordered from the head down to the feet, and from the forms of instruments, is divided into three parts: the first part is the head, the second part is the neck, and the third part is the trunk.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	When using cauterization with fire or in acute medical treatment and for memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Is that book the whole treatise?
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I ask about the quality of the materials used for that cauterization and in what collection it is forbidden to use cauterization.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the speech on the quality of the material for cauterization and the collection is long and prolix, subtle by knowledge, and secret; and many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree with each other, and for me a little of their words is enough to fear perversion.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore, I say that cauterization comforts the whole universal collection of its material or its matter, except for two collections, which are the hollow matters of its matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the hollow and dry collection of its matter, it dries up; four others said that cauterization is used for that, and the others said the opposite, that cauterization is not convenient in illness, which is due to quality and dryness, and nature of the fire is quality and dryness, and it is not appropriate that illness be cautious and dry as it is cooked and dried to be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	When one says the opposite of this, that by cauterization, it is beneficial in the entire tail of the female body and dry that appears in the chest of men, when you compare the chest of a man with his humidity to the entire fire, it harms the chest of a man.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And you say for the speech of this, that I have already experienced this with my own eyes in discovering.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But rather that comes to mind is that which has already been expropriated and exercised in the capital of cauterization for the exercise, and known the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of the diseases in their members, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But rather in other compositions, it is not about your fear, and mainly in the wet and dirty diseases, where all doctors are agreed on this, and are not discordant in the benefit of cauterization in these.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And wise sons, children, know that the secret of curing by cauterization for fire and its benefit is in cauterization for medicine, as it is simple, the fire which does not reach the member which is cauterized and does not notice the other member but only adjusts it with a little harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	When the pain reaches the joints of the body, and often it happens in the difficult-to-heal limbs, and it is not easy to alleviate, it is necessary to seek medical attention immediately.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	The fire, due to its sublimity and good substance, does not cause harm unless it is excessive. And we are known by experience and long service in the art of understanding the true causes; and for this reason you are excusated from the length of this speech, and if it were not for your free will in this moment to speak about the fire, and the quality of the operation of the heart and the expulsion of the sickness through which the sicknesses are expelled, the philosophical speech would be demonstrated, which is sharp in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Indeed, children, when it is convenient to cauterize and rest the best time of the day, they do not follow the time.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by the passage of time is submerged in the youth of that which has the cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary pain, more and faster, those that do not suffer delay for so that it is feared that those that will come are malicious, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	When there is no pain in your feet, or rather, as they say among the common people and barbers, this is because the gout that is cured by cauterization does not always heal at once, and it takes time for the consequences to appear.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not that they are hurt for that reason, but rather because cauterization is not always effective in the place where medicine is applied, which alters the composition and dries out the humors that cause the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, cauterization is often used over medicine because of its great value and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of the Lord's servant.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the disease may return at some time, according to the composition of the disease and its location in the body, as well as the virtue of the patient, and that which is prepared in the heart of the patient from the addition of superfluities in the patient, and that which has been received by the patient through his victories and similar causes; but if the disease to which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in the member of few superfluities and humors, then it is possible that in that place the pain will not return, more so because it is small.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	This is indeed a common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is said that it does not cure but rather profits from medicine or another cause. This means that cautery is used as a final measure when all other medical treatments have failed. It is believed that cautery does not provide a cure in itself, but rather complements or enhances the effects of other medical treatments or procedures.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	However, the cause is actually the opposite of this; and I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not true unless they administer the medications for certain diseases and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, it is the physician who uses cauterization to relieve the patient and profit from it. This means that cautery is only used as a last resort when other medical treatments have been tried and have failed to provide relief or improve the patient's condition. The physician then turns to cauterization as a way to alleviate the patient's suffering and potentially benefit from the procedure.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And I understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not second to what I understand from the common people and many of the doctors. This means that cautery is truly the final measure in medical treatment, and it is not simply a matter of tradition or popular belief. It is a well-established medical practice that is used only when all other treatments have been tried and have failed to provide relief or improve the patient's condition.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	When cutting the points with a pointed cautery, it is better to use one made of gold than iron, and do not cut it otherwise than by equality of the gold and sublimacy of its essence.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	When determining the location for cauterization, ensure it is not too close to the skin, as it may not be absolutely effective, since you have already attempted and experienced that it does not work in any other part of the body except for this one, and cauterization is better than a surgical knife; however, when performing cauterization, use gold instead of iron, as it is more suitable for the intensity of the gold, and prepare the receiving freg; and if you adjust over the ignition, the gold may pierce the skin, and there may be some layers in the focus that the artificer will use for this purpose.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore, cauterization with iron should be made lightly and carefully in the direction of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And you have already ordered this capital in cauterization according to the other capitals, and ordered those of the foot within the feet, so that the patient can ask for what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Cauterization for head pain due to coldness and wetness.
Le capitol primier.	The first capital.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers humidity and coldness upon the accident that caused it, causing soda and multitude of rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the wings and eyebrows, and multitude of sleeping, and toothache and gout, and universally of all maladies that appear due to coldness, which are paralyzed, sore, and apoplexy, and seem similar in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this, which initially commands the thigh that the evacuated waste from the unclean part of the body, for three or four times, according to what is required by the virtue of the thigh and the age of the person and their custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And how do you command that the razor cuts, and how do you place that on your thighs over a low chair and that places your hands over the chest you want?
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And place your hand on the razor's edge, placing the point of the razor on the nose of the person you want to cut.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, as the previous sentence said, mark that location, and then ignite the olive oil cauterization, and this is the form of it:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And place that on the marked location, with your hand descending, which is tightened little by little, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And take your hand lightly and look at the location, and if you see any part of the bone exposed in any amount of the head, then according to the quantity of errors, raise your hand, and if not turn your hand on that iron, on another of that, if it is cold, enter that as you have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a small amount of salt and dissolve it in that place and stir it three times.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And stop on the border that is begging to be cut and stir it over there when the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And cure the place with an anointing tetrafarmacon when it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it has been said that when the Roman plague opens the bowel, so much honey gets into the breast, because it is better and less harmful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they advise those who have the tail cauterized within the bone, and it is held by the cauterization until it is swollen in any part of the spinal column.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And let it be known that this remedy adheres to the bone and its cure.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they advise others that the cauterization goes to the bone and its remedy is as follows: when it is applied with force to the bone, if it presses hard on the bone and the bone breaks, this is the form of alphecati petit:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	 They estimate that the vapors of the head will escape from that place.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If the wound is held for a long time and is cured within the time it has solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these kinds of cauteries used on anyone before, except in cases of fear; and if that is the case, you must, for your health's sake, do it as soon as possible, when the head is divided by a solution of continuity of the vessel, which has been observed in other parts, and particularly when the head of the foot is of natural nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cauterization is not as safe and you should do it; and from that, for your health's sake, it is better to do it.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of head cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When throughout the head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, and it is prolonged in the foot, and used are needles, thorns, purgatives, plasters, ointments, candles, and wax, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not given way to the cause, you should consider whether the head of the foot is of great creation in its nature; and if it does not bleed much, you should cauterize it with another cauterization afterwards.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	When it is necessary to make points on the surface of the thigh, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the coda and expose the bone to reveal the quantity that has been found, and cauterize it with a cautery at the tip of the head in the area called the "V" and place your hand there to keep it warm.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And then take your hand away, and do not discover the bone, for the thigh suffers from a different kind of pain than the pain from all other cap cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you direct this cauterization to its place, where it is said that this cauterization is used for the cauterizations of the thighs and the occiput, and a subtle cauterization is made on that part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter ends.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of ancient non-analogous cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain in the front of the head becomes severe, or if there is a sharp pain in the wrist, it should be removed by medicine from the head, and the other cure should be administered according to the diseases you have mentioned; and this should not be neglected, cauterization can be made in two ways: either with acute medicine that burns, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May cauteries be used in medicine, as you take a heated pin, and press around those areas of the wounds, covering them with something to prevent infection.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And if you find the location of the pain in the temple, use a sharp needle and enter it where the pain is located, entering it as far as it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And press firmly on the affected area with a cloth, and leave it for three hours; then take off the cloth and treat the wound with two or three times a day, and return to the area submerged in water when the place is sore.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And cure that as soon as it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you see, use some burning medicines that you have written in the book of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The use of cauterization is followed by this method: iron for cauterization, and this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a clamp clavicle, where the top of the wound is shaped like a thorn in which there is a curve, and in the middle part of the wound it is slightly eminence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And place your hand over the painful location, and pull out the small bell slowly - so as not to tear the artery that is left - and roll the small bell little by little at high speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the quantity of blood that is consumed by the part of the spine that you have opened, and it is raised up, then raise your hand but not so much that the artery is not raised up, so that no flow of blood comes out.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if you happen to have a piece of copper in water and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then place a piece of cloth around the border, and take care not to expose it to any moisture.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you see, make a point at the end of the thigh using a cautery, and watch for an incision in the artery in this unusual part properly.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of ancient emigrant cautery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure the ancient emigrant by the treatment that has been said of the previous cure, and what has been said in the divisions of the diseases, and do not take advantage of the cure, and sometimes for the disease that does not suffice to the first cauterization of medicine or the cauterization of fire, you will see that you cut the thigh with the cauterization tool at the location of the pain, or wherever it is; and then stop your hand for a while and press it over the incision in the artery and pass it through the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	The first source sentence translates to: "However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is harmed by chewing, and that the tail does not become enlarged and the nerves that cause that, and that it does not expand too much.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the custody and caution of the flow of sand from the artery that is blocked, then in the abscess of the same it is feared, and mainly to that which ignorantly does what he does not study and does not practice; and therefore the operation is started on the same.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come to remember the regimen of the flow of sand in case of an accident to the artery according to the right hand, in the place where this is located.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	E si you see of this malady that does not satisfy this cautery and see the course of the wound tolerable, cauterize it in the same place as the head of the thigh has been cut, and cure the plague when it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	E if you see, maintain the cauterization that has been said in the capital of stretching of the artery with an increase of two points, and this cauterization is better than the previous one and gives less pain.
Capitol .v.	Capital.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of the pains of gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the gout there is pain in the foot due to swelling and it is cured by treating the causes locally and by the other treatment that I have said in the division, and the pain does not worsen, then you must cauterize, and this is the one that is called a point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When making a point on the nail, and it is to be placed at the circumference of the entire toe as the nail rotates, or in the circuit of any part if the pain is in that part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	After applying the cautery to the toe, there will be fewer and fewer blisters that will eventually reach the intended location.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery points are made all over the toe, and it is taken care of, and the affected areas are cared for, they will eventually be healed.
Capitol .vi.	End of volume VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization of burns.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Burns that are cured and treated with cauterization are not the same as those caused by scars, according to what has been said in the sections of the diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization for sclerosis or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure the burned part with jewelry, gauze, and bandages, and do not comfort your cure, you have to cauterize the toe three times: the first time is the tip of the toe, the second time a small piece of cloth is placed there to hold it in place, and the third time the conjunctiva of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When stopping the hot iron for the opposite side of the affected part, it does not seem to have any effect on the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is that you cauterize the tip of the extremity of the swollen nose with a small piece of the corn of the head, and on the other side, the length of which is equal to the length of the same part, and then your hand is placed there until it is burned by the amount of the tumor of the affected vertebra.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the method of cauterization, and it is specific to the surgeon, the form of which is shown on the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it seems that this is a small point that few people understand; and indeed, it is superfluous to add too much detail on this matter.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area with what is indicated in the process when it is healthy.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol, Volume VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy occurs and is treated as follows and does not confirm your medicine and the patient's thighs do not have fever, then you should cauterize that part four times: on all parts of the head; and cauterize and the hand of the patient, as they have said; and cauterize in the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The manicure of the cautery is made according to the size it has been cut.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the entrance of the stomach; and it is lesser; and it is necessary that you proceed with care.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	For the cauterization of oblivion, a flat one is made.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover them with large and small pills to make the vagina comfortable.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And rub the whole of the vagina and stop on the inside of its wall, as described in the chapter of the plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And stop those veins, as much as possible, and that is the manicure of the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order that has already been said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if for those who are sick, it is; and otherwise, make three cauterizations on the same side of your head, which are coming from the side of the forehead to the side of the chin.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And stop between each cautery the largest part of the said, and proceed with care to the cautery as it has been said.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If the patient's thigh is tolerable, then make the cautery on the inner side of the thigh; and if there is more addition, make the cauterization on both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Proper care for that part that is to be healed; and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to the given form.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of thorns and mollification of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in the head's molding and according to what has been said; and take the head of the thigh, and make cauterization on the inner side of the thigh, and make cauterization on all sides of the head, and make cauterization on the opposite part of it, and make three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the hip.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the mollification of the body of too much and the tolerant thighs and the thigh is strong, then make cauterization on that with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of both sides, and afterwards make cauterization inside where it is crushed by the hamstring of the leg, and elevate the other leg.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	When treating that which is healthy, and this is olive oil cauterization.
Capitol .x.	I'm sorry, I need the context to provide an accurate translation.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized the epileptic except that epilepsy is by fleecing.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore you modify the brain of him at the beginning of his youth and at the other treatment that they have ordered in the division when the thigh is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is an infant who did not tolerate the medicines, then administer guarguarissmes and mastiguatoris to modify the serum, and this for several days, for the benefit of the wounds.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And cut the head of the thigh, and then cauterize that with a cauterization in the previous location of the head, and another cauterization on the occiput of him, and over each corn of the head you can cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the thigh is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that with the ones I have mentioned, having paralyzed and softened the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	When the cauterizing oil is applied, it should be followed by...
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is young, then stop cauterizing with this delicate method.
Capitol .xi.	Capitulum XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Chapter on Cauterization for Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are humid and corrupted, and have become very large and flaccid, then cauterize those parts with the cauteries that have been mentioned for paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity and declines into melancholy, and the thighs of the patient are wet, then give him this remedy to purify the brain after that which was given before in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And shave the head of the patient, and make a small round cut, and place that over the top of the head, and tie it down in that location of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient's head is sixty years old, and he is held by all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And place the liniment; and it is worthy of being bound with ancient woolen threads.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	When you heat that over the fire with gentle heat, the one who suffering from it feels relief when they are in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And you want that over the top of the head of the patient in the circle, and you should let him go in until he is warm.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And you apply this to the thigh once a week for a few days, or in the other regimen of the patient when he is cured; or if you prefer, cauterize those points as small as possible, but make sure you have the order of an attentive cauterist: this is a specific type of cauterization that hydrates the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And you stop that hair from being wet or damp.
Capitol .xii.	Capital, Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the cauterization of water that comes down in the heel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are declared that water has come down in the heel by the senhals which I have told you in the division, you begin and give in the buttock to the patient what is necessary to moisten the head of the patient, and hold that with all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command that the head be shaved, and cauterize that part with the pointed cautery in the middle of the scalp; and cauterize that part with two cauters on two temples if the commencement of urine is in two waters, or on one temple if the commencement of urine is in one water.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cauterize all the veins and arteries that are left behind the codpiece; and these cauterizations are to be made in that point on the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep watch for the flow of salts when cauterization is performed; and if you see the flow of salts or any medicine, keep it for your own use.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And when you come to know which is extracted from the arteries and the abscess of those and the caution of the flow of salts, then...
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes a few bones are cauterized in the neck, with two cauterizations produced on each side.
Capitol .xiii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a recognizable language. It seems to be a mix of Latin, Italian
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and cause inflammation in the veins and arteries that are located in the forehead area and it is observed that there are many wrinkled flaccid vessels, then cauterize those points with a pointed cautery that have been found in the eye of water coming from the eyes, and cauterize in the middle of the forehead and cauterize on two temples and on two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If you require an addition, then make points along the entire length of the gallbladder above the small nail on the extremity of the protruding part.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol, Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization for the smell of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating that which has been said in the division and does not benefit from your treatment, then you should show yourself and give to the patient's thighs three blows with a cushion; and then cut off the head of it, and cauterize the small nail with the larger nail.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that small nail with the large nail on the two extremities of the hair, leaving a small one.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep from the arc that you did not burn that one.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of this cauterization, this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol, Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization for the softening of the eyelids of the toes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the toe is softened by poor care or moisture, then you should cauterize that eyelid with a cauterization of this kind; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you, make incisions on that side of the two fleshy parts with a small sharp cut, and let the ends of the tendons be long.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each incision should be according to the size of the fleshy part.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard with your knife, but according to the size of the fleshy part that is being cut.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cauterizing the eyelid of the cat when the whiskers are converted into parts of flesh and finger.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the whiskers of the cat are converted into parts of flesh and finger, cauterize at those points with two knives, either one or a burning iron or a medicinal iron.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize with fire, command the patient to look at his whiskers as they are, comparing them to those of a man, and if the finger is prolonged and twisted, then you must stretch the hairs of the cat with a needle so that it is not broken when those whiskers are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When newborns and infants start to cry, it is necessary to stop the mouth of the child in the middle of the nose, and then cover the eyes of the baby's face with a cloth, and hold it until the sign of death appears on the baby's face, and this is the beginning of the action of the doctor.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then stop cutting the hair in the scalp or on the neck with scissors or tweezers, and shave the beard if necessary.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then use the cautery of which this is the form of it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure that you have covered, little by little, in circular motions, until the surface of the skin is charred like a candle, completely apparent actually.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health of the second work is that you see the eyelid of the face already closed and the eyes of the baby raised, you have to make the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it there for three minutes, and then cover the hair that borders it until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	When treating that wound, enter it if it is healthy.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the eye returns to its normal position due to any cause and the eyelid is softened, then make another cut with the cautery on that same spot as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the eyelid is inside the eye, then make the cut on the side that is raised to the natural location and is engaged and does not push the tears out.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	If the cautery is used in medicine as you command on the thigh that the eyelid enters and is prolonged and engaged, and it should be made in the form of a mirror's edge, then it is appropriate to make it with a piece of paper.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take a piece of cloth and soak it in live coals. And, or rather, and mix those causes with it, and make it into a paste for the purpose that it may not be frozen; and expand that over the paper that is made in the form of a mirror's edge, and place it over the other eye; and place the other eye on the album page, and the cap of the thigh should be at the top.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	When the doctor pauses about the medicine and asks if the patient feels the taste of the medicine, which taste is in the mouth as if from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then, when the patient perceives this intense taste, the doctor will give the medicine and ask for water; then, when the taste stops, the doctor will wash the mouth with water and consider if the eye has been washed with water as it should be with vinegar or with lemon juice, which is pleasant; and if not, he will return to the medicine at the location where it has not been applied yet and has not been damaged by your operation and has not contracted the cold.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then, he will stop shaving around the area where the wound is and care for it with ointment or another substance to make it heal.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to ensure that your operation guards against neglectful diligence in the eye and if the eyelid is swollen every day and some cause of the pits in the eye is in the eyelid, you must repeat your medicine over that location where the eyelid is swollen, and as you did at the beginning, and if it becomes healthy.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of fuelha of magic.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You know that the joints of men vary according to size and thickness, and therefore, according to this, your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not assume that the path of rectification is towards that which is being studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol, Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of the cauterization of the fistula that is in the lacrimal of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure the fistula as they have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confirm your cure, then you should cauterize according to this manner: command the disease that pauses the cap in the upper part, and hold the cap of it between the upper parts in such a way that it is not rough nor agitated by the upper part.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then pause the cauterization enfusion in the album of the wool or in the mucilage of the ptillon over the hip of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cauterization that this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The which is cured, how it is formed like a cane or a pen of the voltor, from one end to the other, where the cauterization is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you wish, it may enter into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you want to be in good health as you try.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is more difficult is better than the second work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And apply the fistula if it is opened, and then remove the disease and dry that part.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, you open it and extract the sore from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place your hand over it with the cautery that is not yet lit, and take that as the first part of the tieua, but a little of the cauterization of the hole in the nose so that you do not err and the thigh is quiet, and you place the cauterization on the gray of the hole and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of the cauterization it enters into the bone, then so be it; and if not, you repeat the cauterization one or two times, if it is skilled; and let that stay for three days, and place your hand over it with a border and turn it until it is dry inside that it is cured.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been passing several days and the patient is not getting better, you should stop using the acute, corrosive medical treatment and wait until the bone is discovered and is smooth according to the capital's custom.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Another way to make a cauterization of the fistula: go to the location of the fistula and then pause at that small opening in the subcutaneous tissue where the form of the fistula is; and put in there the quantity of one and an eighth drop of pus fundut; and then apply your hand on the thigh with good retention, and do not hurt the patient because the pus fundut does not reach the hole of that; and cover that with albumin or water, four drops of pus adhere to the location of the fistula and heal it for the meravilhora sanacio.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed as they have said about cauterization and cure, then so be it; and if not, you must administer narcotics through the nose and reduce the fistula to the nose of the patient according to its location.
Capitol .xviii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	It seems like the text you provided is in Catalan, not a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz." translates to "Watery discharges cause fissures in the lips, and more so in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:" translates to "So then, how do you treat those fissures that have been told in the divisions and not to make your cure profit from the small cauterization knife according to this form that it should be::
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella." translates to "And the cavity of the fissure should be according to the subtlety of
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras." translates to "Appropriately pause that initial cutting in those fissures as soon as the cauterization reaches the opening of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat." translates to "And treat that as soon as it is healthy.
Capitol .xix.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca." translates to "Of cauterization of a fistula in the m
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat." translates to:
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the abscess is healed and cured, then so be it; otherwise, you must discover the location and cut into the bones according to what will come out of their head.
Capitol .xx.	The text you provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	1. "Capitol XX" is likely a reference to a specific chapter or section in the treatise, but without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth become loose, and they are treated with medicines but do not heal, then place the corner of the mouth over the wound in the middle of the face, and approximately ignite the cauterization in the form that will best suit you, as if you were pressing the tooth against the cheek and enter the cauterization quickly, and then take a small piece of paper that the mouth covers the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to become heated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And take your hand, and iterate the cauterization on some points according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And let the patient hold their mouth with salty water for an hour and see if it holds, and then check if the loose tooth is closed and the gum is strengthened and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitulum xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or it is frozen, or vermifuge, or the medicine does not cure, then you should cauterize on that spot with two hands: either with the cauterization of cowhide, or with the cauterization of fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	If you do not know how to make the incision, take some pieces of cow or beef and cut them into strips, then fold them over the end of the nail, and press that piece against the painful part firmly until it stops bleeding.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And if you go further, it may reach the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you go further, place wool or a knife on the edge of that, and press it against the painful tooth, and press it against that burning iron when it reaches the edge of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cauterization of the foot is that you attend to the wound or iron, and it is in the body of some flesh and the sharpness of the iron does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And if you light the cauterization in that form, and press it against the tooth and put your hand in it when it is hot; and make some observations of how the pain remains or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	When the pressure of that cauterization makes the wound close and hold it for an hour and remove the cauterization, this is the form of the cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	When you see that the end of the point is close to your hand, then heat it with fire.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	De cauterizacio de extrophulos" translates to "Of cauterization of extrophulos
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophulos are of flexion and of cold humors and not obeying the digestive tract by medicines, and you see the digestive tract showing slight signs, then you ignite the cauterization with the form that this follows, having two ends with which you can scrape the smoke from the other end, and pause the ignition over the wound one vein, and another if you prescribe, until it reaches the opening of the wound.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the gout is small, you should stop the cauterization according to the amount of gout, and then press on the area for three hours and leave it there, as it may be useful to relieve the pain caused by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that wound and try to dry it within what is healthy.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the needle or cauterization is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of inflammation of the throat and constriction of the neck.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When cold humors invade the bronchus, and more so when there is overall frigidity, you should cover that part of the body with something warm, and then cauterize it at the point of the groin in the area that is affected.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to get the cauterization on the groin or burn yourself from the waistbone of the body, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And you should cauterize that part with another cauterization at the joint of the knee in the upper part of the leg.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of this should be made in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And similarly, take care of that gout which is previously entered, if it is cured.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization of the lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When the cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors and the patient does not have fever or chills and it is an old cough, then cauterize that part with two points on the shoulder in the areas where the bones are loose and swollen; and also cauterize at the mouth's side between two milks; and let the cauterization be done by a clavilh according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, your cauterization is made with points at the cauterizations called points, in the form that precedes in the relief of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And points are inside the bodies for those; and similarly, take care of that gout which is previously entered if it is cured.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cauterization already has three ramps for that cauterization, you can make three points according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	I apologize, but I am unable to provide a translation for the source
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	From the cauterization of the tip that is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the helper's head is dislocated due to slippery humors and does not stop in the moment of returning, it must be returned to its displacement within which it was at that time used to return, and by a slight movement it is dislocated again as if it were being pushed back, as we have witnessed, reducing first the displacement, and then the buttock is placed over the knee or over the axis; and then raise the spine that is in the part of the fingers of the left hand to the parts where you place your thumbs when the joint is dislocated at the parts of the fingers.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is important that the cauterization has two heads; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And it is important to cauterize the spine when it penetrates into the other thigh; and this figure of cauterization will be of four heads cauterization.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And these are the subtleties that follow according to the number of attempts; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some wounds are adjusted according to this count and by the cauterizations that are.viii.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place your hand over the cauterization point and make it stick to the wound, and the member will not hurt for any time as long as it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation occurs in the parts and tart is called gout, then make a cut on the muscle at the cauterization point or on the points of cauterization, and when the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the thigh is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain occurs in the stomach and moisture enters that part of the body, and if you continue the treatment and do not confirm, then it is possible that the thigh is over the seat of pain, and extend your hands and feet and make three cuts on the cauterization point as follows: one cut of the size of a certain cauterization point, and two cuts on the two sides of the cauterization point, until the figure of the triangular cauterization is formed; and stretch those that are not adjusted to make a suture.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of the two thirds of the length of the coccyx.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the figure of the cauterization is this form, and if you want, cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cauterization according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is cauterized at the point that is feared by this cauterization: and it is that you are over the stomach with points according to the quantity you want, and then cauterize that point in the cauterization; and then cure that part of the cure that was previously treated until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the gout of the foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the pain in the foot increases due to coldness or wetness or large ejection, and the coccyx is getting out of its normal position and is being pushed out by excessive excretion, and this coccyx is laid over the cervix, and you are afraid to do three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity on the foot below the hip bones, the doctor will lie down in the decubitus of home.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	When the space is equal to the size of the largest part of the body that corresponds to the cauterization, and the cauterization is made along the length of the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	If you do not understand your own cauterization method.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of water that is applied is equal to the amount of the specific part of the intestine, and it is not adjusted; and if the thigh is on the feet of the patient; and if it is not, then the hand should be gently held, which has already extended its fingers, and raise the patient's knees.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And is this the form of the cauterization:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And can you possibly cauterize these with a cauterization iron, when you have skill and prudence in the art?
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to process too much in the cauterization, and apply the specific part of the entire intestine throughout the body, so that the entire intestine is inside the feet, where the thigh is subtle; and you know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of perforation of the wound by the cauterization of the patient.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is pain or inflammation in the foot and one wants to know if the inflammation is in the flesh or in the skin, if it is in the flesh, the leg becomes heavy and painful at its point of origin.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain is sharp and often exhausts the doctors with their treatment of him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the leg should be covered over the shoulder blade; and clearly mark the location of the inflammation that has been caused; and carefully choose the cauterization that is most suitable for the form that is prescribed in the next page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it and cauterize when the entire chain is burned, when it reaches the hip, when it goes through the skin, when it causes pain.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And treat that for the cure of the other inflammations when it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this form of cauterization except for the one that is studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in those from which many diseases are cured; but this has been experimented on some wounds that were severe about this operation, but less so than the one that we must use, and it is more effective.
Capitol .xxix.	1. Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors, it is called gout by doctors.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	When the ancient cauteries of surgery are used for the treatment of flees in this manner, and it is this that you take from the flees of alchemy, long and dry a flee that is found, and it is of the largest kind of the same.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	1. And you have lowered that part into oil and fire, and have cauterized it with a cautery in that place which is between the bones of the elbow and the collarbone; and two small cauteries were placed further away, one slightly declining towards the side from which the beard was cut off, and two cauteries in that position which are declining between the fifth ribs and the breastbone, declining a little on the sides; and another cauterization in the lower part of the chest; and another over the stomach, and three cauterizations on the sides; and one cauterization in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and two cauterizations on the two sides of the stomach, further down the cauterization which is between the two shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	2. And do not worry if you do not understand the use of the cauterization, as it is in the manifestation of the code in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	3. And it has already been told to those who use iron cauteries similar to fire and ignite that place, and place it in that position between the ribs, entering that and the aposteme, and remove the sania if it is present there, as they have said in the aposteme of the patient.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this incision, no fear of cauterization is needed, for it often happens in the place where the fistula was made and is not treated.
Capitol .xxx.	The first line of the text is "Capitol .xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the mast".
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the wound of the mast, it is customary to say that the treatment is in division and not your own treatment. Then cauterize on it, there are three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three cauterizations or four lines according to the length of the mast according to the figure of the cauterizations of the patient, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cauterization there should be the greatest part of a penny or a few mes, and the hand of the cauterization is the hand that has been said in the cauterization of the patient's engagement.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not understand your wound, and the wound is easy on the other side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another hand for cauterization, so you think that you do not know the cauterization because you have two vertiments, which have been said in the capital of dislocation of the muscle, and elavate the codon that is at the end of the mast that passes through the left wound.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	When you raise your hand above the patient's back to the longest part of the body, so that it is cauterized according to the latitude of the country.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then enter the two fingers, carefully, in that point where those parts of the spine are penetrated by the codena.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And remove the cautery; and then it is four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you see, cauterize with three fingers.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cauterization that lies flat on the thigh for too long, which may be more comfortable than the previous causes in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of gout cauterization.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization does not work on gout but on alcohol properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the gout with the cures of the curacy that have been said in the division and do not confirm your cure, you notice that this cauterization has four cauteries in the circuit of the belly and one cauterization on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the meatus, and two cauteries between the spines of the two, one cauterization on the right side of the chest, and another cauterization on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	When the depth of the cauterization is appropriate for the tip of the finger.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then apply the cauterization carefully, so that it does not cause pain for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the cauterization, as it is necessary to add more ingredients to the medicine, and quickly return to help with care.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cauterization is like that of the abdomen that is being cauterized, and it is that which is in the form of an olive for the other, following the previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitulare Bypassus
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Chapter 32 of the Capitulare Bypassus on the cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the thigh in a place that is between the ear and the anus, and raise your hand over the cauterization and do not pull on it; and then raise your hand, and do not return to that place for everything, as long as the stagnant water remains.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The first source sentence translates to: "This is the method of cauterization: On each of the two thighs, place two cauteries, and on each of them, make a cut at the end of the cauterization blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	When making the incision, follow the length of the thigh: and then the denuded and the other side the edge of the thigh; and over each thigh, two incisions are made.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	When the plague is opened for long periods of time, as some poisonous waters come out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And cure those causes that have been said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterization of things from the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When things from the belly are perforated and become infected due to coldness that weakens the intestines, it is the digestive and retentive intestine, which is in the stomach and intestines, and should be treated as part of the curative measures and not confessed, and sometimes the thigh suffers cauterization of the intestine exposed, they are cauterized with a large cauterization over the stomach according to what has been done in the cauterization of the stomach, in the cauterization of the circle, and four cauterizations around the subtle embellishment, in the clavicle, and cauterization on the subtle alloy over the large aloes, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the exuberant humors and the thigh tolerate it, they should cauterize that over the pentenilh and the intestines, and very well adjusting two cauterizations over the stomach and a part of the thighs, four is perfect cure of which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas" translates to "On the cauterization of ancient gout". This
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz." translates to "When ancient gout or a gross humor fregus or a wet corruption is found in the body and is cured by the doctor without leaving any other cure, then three cauteries are made on the pus of the spondilh of both small and small triangular, and two cauteries are made on the ombelic cays.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient often blushes, then do cauterize that on the stomach with a large cauterization as precedes; and a cauterization on the thigh, and another cauterization on the belly, and leave the cauterization for some time, and cure the patient when it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of hernia, the opening is appropriate.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cauterize the hernia, you must choose the cautery that is closest to the ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place that cautery in the opening of the hernia, and then close it with a thread, and enter when the cauterization reaches the orifice of the vein of which you see the sanc.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make one or two, if they are many, cauterize each of them according to what they have found, and cure those who confer the enguents when they are healthy.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you cauterize with a large cauterizing iron on flesh, it will not heal well.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitulare de nobis et familiaribus. (Capital of our
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The treatment of cold humors that cause joint pain is called gout by doctors.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, the patient is frightened by this, and it is cured with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one finds in nature fistulas that are old, the skin is corrupted and the humors are corrupted, and therefore it is fitting that a probe be made with great care, and the depth of the hole should be measured in front of the point to be probed.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	It is believed that the cauterization resembles fire.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place this cauterization on the fistula, and according to the quantity in which you have traced the point.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And continue over that until the burned parts of the corrupted corpses are completely blackened or two or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	1. Keep an eye on the combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the heart of the bladder or the heart of the intestine, keep an eye on all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a place of flesh and thinks it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	2. Then, if the location inside that is healthy, proceed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	3. If the location is sealed, and the materials have been removed, and there are signs of healing over time, you know that it has been cured completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	4. If the materials are not of the patient's own, you know that they penetrate or in the prescription of the patient they corrupt, or cause aquos to fall from those causes from which remorse will be remembered in that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	5. Capital.xxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	6. Of cauterization of the warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	7. When in the warts there is pain from cold or from large ventilation, and if the thigh of the patient is heating up, you know that cauterization should be done on those over the warts, am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	When it is necessary to treat a wound with a cauterizing iron, then place the iron on the wound for a short time, and three lines of cauterization will be created, and fewer blisters will appear in the future.
Capitol .xxxviii.	This is a Latin phrase that translates to "Capitol 88.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes thin and malleable due to cold and humidity, causing the urethra to not retain urine, then cauterize the affected area at the end of the urethra with a cautery iron, and also cauterize at another point in the middle of the urethra.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of notches on the punch; and cauterize that at the lower end of the two, or at two points if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be made according to the process used.
Capitol .xxxix.	This is a Latin phrase that translates to "Capitol 8
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the clitoris.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity enter the clitoris, and there is no possibility of circumcision, and the menstrual flow becomes corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and pain occurs in the area of the clitoris, then cauterize that location with three cauteries along the umbilicus as was said in the cauterization of the bladder; and cauterize on the lower end of the two, or at two points, and make the cautery clavilh.
Capitol .xl.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treat
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	ion, specifically about cauterization for the treatment of ankle displacement. Here's a line-by-line translation of the text:
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When humors become wet and infiltrate the knee joint, and cause inflammation of the surrounding tissues, and it is said that the thigh is extended over the other when compared to it.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation becomes flattened in that way.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, it is advised that you cauterize the thigh over the knee joint of the cauterization tool in a similar way, because you will have to touch the circumference of the joint as it swells, and so that the joint falls into its proper position.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cauterization tools used precede the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cauterization is not available to you, then perform cauterization on that part using three cauterization tools made of olive oil.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the amount of cauterization depends on the quantity of the dissection of the entire colon; and it should be cared for when it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xli.	Capital. Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is felt in the shoulder part, and its cause is due to cold and dampness, the body is treated as has been said and not confined, and this is antiquated, and one should cover the shoulder with large pills made of fresh or artificial drugs or similar substances; and it should be cauterized there.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the hand of the cauterization is followed by two hands: either the cauterization is made with burning drugs, or it is made with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Two scientific hands are used, of which one is the one that cauterizes it over the part of the ankle of the patient, and three cauterizations are made in this way, on each side; and they should be done at good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And are the spaces between each cauterization the quantity of the thickness of the drug and if the cauterization is made with oil or with a large one.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some may be that the cauterization is made over the middle of the head of the ankle for that there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize on the circle that is preceded by the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and that it is a circle continuous and burning the entire chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the method of cauterization in cold cases when pain is adhered to the ankle and not extended within the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If the wound is extended to the thigh, then burn it with two burns on the thigh at the location where the evacuation of the evil will cause pain; and a burn on the cavity with four cuts of about a finger's length on the part that is most affected.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the burn is deep, and the depth of the burn depends on the amount of the intestine that is pushed out.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the evacuation causes the pain to spread throughout the area where the cut was made, then burn it with three or four or more points of burn if directed by the evacuation.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the evacuation causes pain to be felt further down the thigh, then burn it with a deep burn on the thigh.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all burning that you do not use the burn as a nerve or great artery, and that for this reason you may cause the patient to suffer from pain or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have seen one and the other of those which were burned on the cavity and after in the burning, and the bed was inflamed throughout that the tumor achieved the knee, and the bed was burned and corrupted and corrupted the whole knee.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When a sudden and serious condition of the stomach occurs, and it leads to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each side of this handle.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And use the following methods in cauterization of anguish: make it resemble a circle of iron, where the circumference is the largest part of a palm; and be sure to use it according to the largest size of a sharp bone or a few.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And make that circle another one; and be sure to use it according to the quantity of the bone's notch; and those circles should be divided into two parts; and the length of those sides is a notch or two notches, and make those edges slightly visible in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then place it in the fire when it is wrapped, and let it emit sparks, and place it over the part of anguish, the thighs covered with a cloth.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that part three times in a line.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And let it stay for three days; and apply this ointment to the affected area multiple times; and care for it so that it becomes healthy again.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this kind of cauterization few have used due to the fear of the gaze of it, and therefore few have found those who look at it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May the cauterizations be fewer on those who suffer from this, and they will diminish that place of theirs.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Less cauterizations are used in medicine because you make two circles with armillary spheres perforated in the one that has the gullet of the door of iron; the length of the sides is in the youth of them or as those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space is less than the quantity of the size of it; and they are opened further and deeper, and they hold that between them this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place your hand over the end of the ankle, and compre the tua ma over the end of the ankle; and take water from the tail and pour it between two circles, and that quality of that is as the small fire little by little, and you that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the malaute the mordicacio and the adhustio of lu — quar that atrobo mordicacio ayssi como de foc — after that the mordicacio ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	When raising your arm with the instrument, avoid touching the wet tail of the entire water needed for the wettest water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And press on that border for three days and then continue pressing for three more days, and run the poultice; this helps in relief.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And cure that part as soon as it becomes healthy.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make that statue in it which contains water according to what is made in the wetting of the joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the statue of wet tail water, and you have already written that in the book of the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and inextinguishable fire of one part, and add water to it and let it rest in a new wave of the quality that is poured into the ring, according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And let the fountain of the other wave be poured into another carried wave, and add water to the live alkaline and fire of water that requires two drops of the quality that is given by one drop, and say that you understand this in the first part for good compression, and press the hole that comes from the hot water in the fountain into the carried wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And properly adjust that water, and place it on another to live and another alkali, for that if it is made of strong acidity, it will be maintained in the operations of medicine and cauterization of other members, for which operation a fire is used.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines are some that are cauterized wide, as they are with thread and honey, and cause a sabose in which they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Guilia recounts a man of ancient times about the operation and cure, which is cured of pain in the knee and sciatic nerve, and many are the benefits of that, and it is said that no other cure is needed, and it is healed by a vein such as recommended, where much of that intestine is placed in bath and already knows how to do that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is near a certain tree, and if it is not dry, then the female genitalia is held in recent; and if it is cut off with a few gray hairs, and placed on the knee where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it is seen.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	If the pain is not relieved after three hours or when the patient has lost three pints of blood.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then apply this to the affected area and when the patient's body is swollen, enter it into the ground, and the pain will cease and be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Do you know that this treatment is not used with cauterization unless the evacuation of the chest is necessary?
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	I have already heard that when the goatskin fascia is cauterized with a tight vessel, it is best to use this method: hold the lana (wool) and wet it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the phalanges.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And if you take dry goatskin and apply it to the foot when the pain is caused by carbon, and place it on the wool and leave it until it is expanded.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, and do not stop until the sensation of the biting disappears from the ankle and stops the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of
Capitol .xlii.	the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And when the intest
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	ion has been reduced to its proper position and the hernia has been placed back in its cavity, your hand
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	and other causes of pain in the testicle, such as from tight clothing or from excessive excretion, and for those similar causes, due to the introduction of wet and moist matter into the body.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not always work on this alone, but only on the specific condition that is caused by the discharge of wet and moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is important to note that the evacuation of the testicle is similar to pills and is in the form of three lines according to the latitude of the body, and that the number of cauterization points or cautery may vary depending on the tolerance of the testicle and the quality of the man.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it is necessary to note that cauterization is made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, make points on three or four points using a cautery or four claviloth medial according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitulum.xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	The first line of the text is "De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat." This can be translated as "From cauterization at
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement." This line can be translated as "Motions visible in this malady of the feet; and from the beginning of the treatment on the children, it is essential to note the structure of their limbs, elevation, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	When the lower back pain becomes excessive and the patient begins to lean on other vertebrae, it is necessary to take action.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	When you see this and want to stop, you can burn that point with a cautery, following this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	and hold the cautery on the entire part of the lower back spine.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, burn in the circuit of the lower back spine with the cautery of two or three points.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And treat the area that is healthy according to what they have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Please note that cauterization should not be administered in yellowish areas that are caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	When treating gout caused by cold humors in the feet and not causing further pain, then use cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And is that you cauterize that appropriate evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with the desired cauterization.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And is this the form of the cauterization:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain spreads to the neighboring joints or other joints, and it is necessary to stop the pain, then use cauterization on each knee with three or four points of this cauterization oil.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If these cauterizations are necessary for you, then use cauterization on that and do not press too hard with your hand, only around the specific area of the knee.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain spreads to both knees, then apply the cauterization that was told in the capital speech.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is in the most part of the body, and it is called sugar, then make points in the circuit of the limbs as they rotate, make points in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If pain remains in these parts, then point on the circuit of the sweat glands over each nook and cranny of the body.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If pain worsens in these areas as the joints or muscles, then cauterize the entire part of the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not remove the badly managed patient and the reception of medicines, for if it is well managed and the condition improves, this cauterization will be beneficial, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a wound occurs in the ankles and testicles, and the intestine passes through the hernia to the abdomen, then do as follows: first, order that the patient fasts on the day you command, and use gentle causes for so that the needle of the abdomen does not come out.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient on your side over the abdomen, and command that you hold the abdomen until it is clear or there is a sign of the hernia or the intestine.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the thighs and try again on the bones of the patella and send it to the end of which seems like the gout of a circle in the subcutaneous parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And approximately how this cauterization of this kind is done:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When there is a hot pain in the body, it is called fever.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then pause the cautery on that spot with your hand, and if you can feel the pulp of the nail entering the hollow of the toe; and repeat it on another place if you haven't succeeded in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the condition of the intestine during your cauterization, that you do not burn that intestine because it does not come out over the thigh or other great misfortune.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you know that if you do not feel the pain, do not consider your operation successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And make sure that the cauterization of children is done with great care according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And keep the site of the cauterization for three days, so that the wound of the focus does not become worse.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And keep that for the other patients who are cured.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	If the patient's thigh is put on the right side for fourteen days, so that the wound is sealed and there is no discharge.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And cover that you pause the nutrition according to the length of time of the cure of the patient, and that the intestine does not come out because of the effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to leave after fourteen days, administer appropriate care, and hold it for another fourteen days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it is necessary to work and eat and drink, and to exercise forcefully, when you use this entire regimen of therapy, your health will be completely cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you tell the cure of the ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and so on, and you want that they do not happen again, then cauterize the rupture with cauterization according to the quantity of the focus, and it is that it is exhausted from the codena as the last part of the stomach; and keep that which has been said and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	When the first wound is made, the incision is cut with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is easier to sew:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	A line is placed perpendicular to the line of the wound, and another line at the end; then remove your hand from the cauterizing iron, which is better than the first one that was pushed in more.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol 66.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in any member due to strain or impact and does not relieve for a long time and does not please the physician's care, it is necessary to cauterize with a point.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauterization of each member according to its magnitude and thickness, as well as its development and twist, and the location of the twist and the pain in the member.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the patient is healed by the first cauterization, so be it; and if not, you will repeat the cauterization over it. Four times are customary for those pains that are located in one member and reach another member near it, so that you can reach them when the wound is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text "Capitol .xlv
De cauterizacio de lepra.	1. "Capitol .xlvii." is a Roman numeral that translates to "47
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	2. "De cauterizacio de lepra" translates to "Of cauterization of leprosy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	When you want to cauterize that part, consider if leprosy is present and whether it has been cured as said in the division and not done, nor this, and fears about the thigh that corruption comprehends the whole body of him and the entire complexion of him, then cauterize that over the head with a pointed cautery: one on the left side of the head, and one further down, and then to the front of the hair; and two on the back, over the nape or servants.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Finally, when the cauterization has a little effect on the bones, and the scars are displaced, because the expiration of large vapors is relieved from him; then cauterize on the surface next to the pressure.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already expanded over the thigh and manifestly appears, then you should cover that which has been said in the head with cauterization: one on the extremity of the nose, and two on the eyes, and two on the collarbones, and two on the spine, and one on the spine of the back, and one over the shoulder blade, and one near the shoulder, and one over the shoulder, and one over the shoulder, and one over each shoulder, and one over each shoulder blade, and one over each elbow, and one over each wrist, and one over each knee, and one over each thigh, and one over each calf, and one over each ankle, and one over each toe, and one over each muscle; and cauterize that over all the joints of the toes and feet, and on each toe of the feet, and on each nail of the fingers.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	When you hold the nerves that are over the sole of the foot that do not burn, it means that the treatment is working.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	If some wounds are cauterized with a cautery over the bones of the pelvis and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the thigh, it means that the treatment is working.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	You know that the more you cauterize, the less effective and painful it is; and you know that the thigh does not have pain in the cauterization, just as they have them, because the body of the patient has already been stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauterizations are large or small according to the members and joints, according to what precedes the specific tools of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And care for the cauterization with flour, salt, and melted wax, and another cure if it is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	About the cauterization of stunned.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member becomes numb or unconscious and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that stunned member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When the hot cauterization is inserted into the skin of the back, a few drops of blood will come out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply this ointment to the affected area to make it heal.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes, cauterization is done on a part of the body that does not have nerves, such as the back, spine, and neck, and it does not cause pain to the member, and the wound heals quickly.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	However, this should be done with caution, as only those who are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the body and the movement of the nerves throughout the body should perform it.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization of burns that are fatal.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the burn is old and does not respond to the application of medicine, you can cauterize over that area with a little more of the ointment until the whiteness and color of the skin become improved, and the color of the skin changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice made of oats and lentils mixed with rose oil and aromatic leaves, and a piece of cloth to the affected area, and place it over the wound until it heals.
Capitol .l.	The first line "Capitol .l." is not a complete
De cauterizacio de cranc.	De cauterizacio de cranc" translates to "Of cauterization of the c
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut" translates to "When cancer begins and you want that part to stop, you cauterize that point with a pointed cautery in the circuit of the intestine as it rolls.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And they described the scars that were cauterized at the edge of the cauterization; I have not seen this before, four fears that it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen some wounds.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	When there are thorns that have been cut off from the body and placed in a circle around the affected part, as we have said, or in any other way, they should be burned.
Capitol .li.	Capitol. Li is not a standard Latin or medie
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cauterization of adulteration.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adulteration is delayed in maturation, and it is due to excess or the state of the patient, who is old and has few saints, or due to time, and you want to speed up the maturation of adulteration; then cauterize around that part with small points; and apply it so that it does not fasten in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to burn the cauterization, then you must know the type of cauterization that this is the form of: and slow it down in the place of adulteration when it penetrates the coden.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization is placed in that place where it was left, for so that the body of the bracelet is healed; and take care of that within which it is healthy.
Capitol .lii.	The text you provided appears to be in a medieval Latin dialect,
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	which can be translated as "On the cauterization of corrosions". Here's the full translation of the source
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	that corrosions are wandering corruptions in the body, which corrupt like fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you ever notice that the affected area is burned in place where it suffered cauterization, then you should know that few cautery claws are needed, and some larger ones depending on the place where it is burned.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cauterize that of the entire affected area until you completely eradicate the corrosion and do not leave any cause for it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And keep that for three days, and then place your hand over the cauterized areas once a day until all the wounds are completely eradicated and all the corruption is eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And treat that with an ointment that stops the growth of flesh-producing tissue.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the flesh has healed in that place where there is no corruption, then it is; otherwise, repeat the cauterization over the areas that are still burning in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated by some doctors with acute medicine, four times a day in the place of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization is not always effective in relieving pressure.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	When I have already spoken of the cure of the patient in the division, and now take that which is necessary for the emergency.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol, meaning "capitol," is a term used to refer
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of the claws and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Wounds that are visible on the parts of the foot that have been clamped, and are caused by a large, deep wound, which causes pain in the foot; and cauterization is done on those parts with two cautery irons, either hot iron or cold iron.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Fewer hot irons are used that resemble a pin's heat, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the clamp in each part, and is made of thin segments.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And place the hot iron on the clamp, and turn your hand over to the cauterization around that clamp as soon as the cauterization reaches the depth of the clamp.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it remain for three days after beginning to bandage.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And apply the ointment made of salted honey on that part, and let it remain on that for a day or two, until that part is completely removed from its skin.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And properly care for the area that is inflamed due to the generation of dead tissue.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and visible inflammation occurs in the surface of the body, mainly in the chest and feet, you must believe that you are administering to those cauteries with wet or iron or nail point, and take a piece of cloth or a iron or needle point and place it over the claw; and pour a small amount of wet humor into the claw, and wrap your hand around the compress of your hand, and rotate the claw around the hole of the claw, and press the humor cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; and wait for the wound to heal by the mouth of the humor cauda for an hour, and then remove it, and keep the claw with its razitz sira erredicat.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And it is good if you have those and the other within which you come over all those that are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And care for those pus where the razits of the claws are removed as much as possible from the inflamed tissues that generate flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	The first source sentence is "Capitol .liiii.", which can be
De cauterizacio de tremor.	translated as "From the cauterization of trembling." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs due to cold humors in the nerves or fever, or for some other reason, it is customary to cauterize that part with four cauterizations or one over the spines of the back, between each spine with a cauterization; and on the chest of the patient, and over the stomach of the patient, cauterize olive.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the trembling of the patient's shivering subsides and the health of the disease improves, then it is appropriate to apply a plaster or bandage to the affected area.
Capitol .lv.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but "Capitol .lv
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	A burn from an acupuncture accident can occur on the chest.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the body exudes pus, and the pustules are filled with materials that are fatty and corrupted; therefore, at the beginning, as it appears, it should be cauterized over all parts of the fistula, which is the subtle cauterization under the skin, or the end of which is extended to the face; or it is due to prolonged erestologia; or it is cauterized slowly.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the warts are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and I do not doubt it, and the excess is broken into pieces, making them healthy for those who have them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, I believe that this is an appropriate evacuation by curettage.
Capitol lvi.	Capitulum LV.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Chapter LVI of the Book of Cauterization of the Flow of Scars from an Accidental Incision by an Archectomy.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Too many warts have flowed from the archaectomy that was made by the plague, which deformed it, or you must make an incision of the stitch or cauterization of the member, and then it seems to improve, and it is difficult to maintain that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When one has an attack of gout, you should cut away the skin from the affected area and place it over the opening of the artery, and hold it there until that wound is closed and the flow of blood is stopped inside that part which was formerly the course of the artery, and it will not bleed.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then pause in the fire the green cautery a few and large, by name, and blow over them when they are not yet hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take from those a small or a large piece of the skin and place it over the location and press it firmly on the vessel where the affected artery was located, and then cauterize it so that it is closed and restricted to that part which was formerly the course of the artery.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If the artery is expelled from the opening of the artery while you hold the affected part and remove the cauterization, then take another sharp cautery from those which are prepared in the fire and continue to do this until the artery is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and come over to the other side another malice.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	You know that when the artery flues, it is not possible to restrain the flow, and especially when the artery is large, it is not possible with one out of four manieyras: with one it is cauterization as it is said, with another it is extraction when it is not extracted, with four when it is extracted, the extremities of the veins are burned and the restraint of the sanc is restored, or it is liated by a fierce stretching or it is paused over the medicines of which the virtue is restricted by the sanc; and they are strengthened on the pulvinar of the constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	This is the first line of the text: "Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If there is no doctor or physician present and you are alone, then you should perform the incision on the specified site of the vein as they have said, and understand the great pressure that the wound will have on the remaining part of the plague, and on the artery, the said point is not rough; and over the artery, it is scratched with the water of great coldness that has entered when the wound is closed and compressed; and less should be thought about whether it needs cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second part begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation, and ventosias, and phlebitomy, and of plagues and their like.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are phrases from Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter of the entire malady it has been said that cauterization is convenient and necessary with medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments used in those cases are the forms of cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters of the subincision of the head among the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When you process in this capital for that particular purpose, so that the client will be satisfied with it, do as follows:
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you begin this procedure, son, remember that in this capital there is fear for you that it is in the first capital of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For that reason, in this operation, which is this capital motion, it is necessary to take great care, as in the evacuation of the vein or incision over the aposteme or excision for perforation or purification of the plague or extraction of gallstones or incision of urine and its semblantz.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	When all of these symptoms accompany fear and trembling, and in the worst case, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	You have been warned that if you do not take care of this condition, some people will use their hands on your body, which are already affected by illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And they say that if you do not go to the doctor for your illness and it worsens, and because of the severity of the illness in your body, and because the illness is in your body for a long time, then the illness will kill you.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is the one who gives you hope for your life and expects a cure, and the dangerous illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And do not allow yourself to be deceived by the one who shows you that illness; and your caution should be greater than your expectations and your greed; and do not assume any cause for this except for certain science that knows this, and which will be passed on in a laudable way.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication of the one who is healthy converted, wherein there is help for you over acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and of glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God has given you understanding and not to direct or protect you, for this is in your own hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	When you order this chapter to distinguish it from the following chapters of cauterizations, for the care of the head within the feet, so that it is in accordance with your request and of the kind that has been requested.
Capitol primier.	Chapter first.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water which is contained in the head of the child.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that these movements seen in the children's disease must be given to the child and when the nurse shaves the child's head, its life will be shortened.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are seen because of a lack of cleaning that is not cleaned.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease but only in the children; and of all those that I saw were sick and because of this I have seen many works done on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that the child's head was of water and the child's head was very magnificent when it could not be covered by the large size of the child's head, and less that the moisture is increased when the fire dies.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This humidity or is added between the ribcage and the bone, or is added behind the bones on the chest plate.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the humidity is between the ribcage and the bone, and the incision is small, then you must operate in the middle of the head with a fissure of two inches long, and this is the shape of the sputum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If the humidity increases and the incision becomes larger, then you will have two fissures according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is behind the bones, then you will see the fissures of the head completely open and the water will be sprayed when you touch that with your hand, but not on your fingers.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Then you must operate in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And take the incision out of all the humidity; and tighten the fissures with cloths and plumassols; and put on over them a covering and oil every five days, and care for the wound that you make and engorge, and tighten the cap with equality; and eat the member with little humidity when it is comfortable and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	This is a medieval medical treatise written in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The text describes various medical procedures and treatments for different ailments. Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	You should observe that the artery is not torn and does not cause blood vessels to bleed, and the patient's leg does not swell due to this flow of sinew.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the tearing of the arteries that are called hilasses, which are located at the ankles.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Third.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When you cut the cords or wounds on the hips or chest, and it is common to do so, and no one confirms this in writing, but rather the medicine itself confirms it in this case of these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to cut those that the patient wants, and sharpen the edge as much as possible with something hard, and strengthen the knee of the leg with a drap; and consider where the vein is; and the places of each over the places where the hips are, and so many hide them in as few people as possible.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And cover the artery that you intend to cut, and cut through each one with the sharp edge of the bone, and it will be easy to enter into the bone and be close to the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, enter the thick mucous membrane and run it along that artery to those parts of the body.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is twice that of the distance between the two points, when a vein is incised, the sinus escapes and is easily expelled, which deformed by frequent strokes.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear in the incision, you should measure the amount of space from the three points, and approximately send it to the chest, and then enter the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And if the amount of sinus that comes out is small, and less than the amount that should be, and then it is according to the quantity that appears on the surface of the thigh and the repletion of the artery of the patient.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And if you consider the plague, and if there is any cause of inflammation on the bone, then incise accordingly so that it does not lead to the appearance of gangrene cauterization.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you strengthen the plague with plasters and bandages, and cure it so that it is healed inside when it is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	I apologize, but there seems to be an error in the
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	The translation of the line "De extraccio de las arceriales los cuals so en las templas" is: "Of the extraction of the arteries that are
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	The translation of the line "Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat." is: "When there are old and frequent anemias or catarrhs, caused by humors of a gross nature and quality in the limbs of the temples, or sudden and violent pains in those parts, and they are treated with the means of medical curacy and it does not help, we have found that the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those parts where they have shown, has been beneficial.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The translation of the line "E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg." is: "And the means of the operation and extraction of those are those that raze the hairs that are in the temples; and understand that the apparent artery in the temple that you see with your eyes is hidden only in a few people by the force of wind.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If you are hidden, then the buttocks of the patient should be covered with some cloth; and around it, apply a cloth that is rough or damp with water, so that it appears to you that the urethra is clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the suture material of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then sharpen the needle that is easy to enter into the urethra; and then get it in the intestine and extract that from the surrounding tissues from which you extract the thread of the sutures and discover those of the abdominal walls, of all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, then cover that with something at its extremity, and then insert it under the skin of the thigh, and then cut off a piece according to the quantity by which they are tied at the ends of the veins and are contracted, and if it is not cut off, the wound will not heal, for if it is not cut off, the suture will not close completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove the suture from three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the urethra is large, then cover that in two places with something so that it does not fall off or with strings of long length, and do not let it be affected by putrefaction during the consolidation of the plague and turn into wounds.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	When you need to reduce the superfluity that is between two members; and do it at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you want, cauterize that point with the cautery within the bone that is causing the pain, and stay in place until that work is finished.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better work if the patient does not have fever or is not suffering from an inflamed complexion; rather, cauterize those causes that help to reduce the moisture, and thus it is better for the patient's well-being.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Cover the extraction of the arteries that supply the area of the ancient crotch, and place them over the well-dressed polls, and apply it as medicines will make the flesh and bones stronger when it is healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And while you are working, if you see a flow of sinew from the artery, then you should hold that sinew, or with cauterization or with something to cover the area of the crotch, and strengthen your hand within the sinew when it is tight.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If the cause of those is not in your present, then pause on the side about which that part is surrounded, and wet the area with a wet cloth when the sharp cold returns, and it will become stronger afterwards.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	If you are using a hot cauterizing iron, it is because you have already cauterized the vein at two points, and you have noticed the two holes, and then they will pervade the bone and indict the vein in two places, so that it is elongated as much as possible, which are not all supported by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of cauterization:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And is the sharpness of the two points exemplified.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness is less than two points, that is, if it is more acute than two points and does not penetrate the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any growth, the heat of the fire is applied to those and the flesh is cut off slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than any other in its kind and contains many examples.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the spaces are between two thighs, the number of the largest part of the same.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the care for the body of acute and acidic toes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the toes are acute and acidic, and the body of those veins which are over the test of the head from the forehead, and do not satisfy any cause of medical cure, and sometimes the face of the thigh becomes distorted and appears in the front of ambulation as if it were the ambulation of ants, and the toes become extenuated, humid in such a way that the old ones are not as they were before, and the nails are sharp due to the acidity of tears, the ancient diseases in the cure of this operation are spaced apart, and the cure is far from them.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the thigh of the patient the nails which are on the front, and approximately insert three fissures in the front three times the length of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fissure is two thirds: the first fissure is a distant engulfment along the length of the nose in the upper part of the face, and the second follows the movement of the eyelids that are in the lacrimal, and the third part of the other.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	When guarding the incision of the arteries that are in two layers, and extend your hand for the continuation of biting the mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If the space of any incision is three times adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have a sponge or cloth wrapped around it that dries the sands.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert the tip of two sharp ends, the one of which is the form of the incision of this:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the division of the temples to enter into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excavate all the chain that is between two incisions over the bone, and if it moves to the second incision, proceed with the following:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then insert the rest of this and enter another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp side of that blade by the fat and the rest of the coden, and the leopard's claw over the bone, and press that inside where it came to the fissure, and cut off all those that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	When the incision is continued along this path, and it approaches the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And push that the amount of pain increases, expose the locations of the swollen feet of the patient.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And pause in each fissure where the old hair grows thick, and place your hand on those parts that are wet with oil and vinegar, and you will see that it does not cause a sty to form.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the liquor and administer a large infusion of water or tea, and apply this to the wound which is red and pinkish and other within which the diseases are cured.
Capitol .v.	Capital.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of hangnails by cutting and the lines descending from the parts where the nails are attached to the finger.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the nail is cut and continued, and sometimes the lines of the fingertip become very small, and the eyes are affected by them, and the ulcers on the eyelids, and in the head of the finger there is sharp pain and excoriation due to this accident, you know that these things happen because the materials and nails do not come from the veins of the parts where the nails are attached.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for this condition is to command the patient to face the wall, and then insert a small object (such as a knife or a bone) into the opening at the front of the head, starting from the left temple and moving towards the right. The object should be inserted until it reaches the skull, and the patient's mouth should be open to facilitate the process.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry completely the affected area with a sponge or cloth, and then fill it with a mixture of water and vinegar.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply a paste made of powdered herbs and oil to the affected area, so that it does not cause further irritation or inflammation.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When you see that the apostem has diminished, apply a poultice made of powdered herbs and oil to the affected area, starting from the nayser carn and moving towards the skin. The poultice should be applied to help dry out the flesh and prevent further inflammation, as if you were mixing flour of wheat with four parts of colfen and adding water, and then making a plaster with the mixture and applying it to the affected area.
Capitol .vi.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	The provided text is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in a different language or code. However, I can still try to
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Translation:
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then pause in the circuit of the aureola around some parts of the thighs, and extend the aureola to the parts thereof, as many loops as possible are forgotten about these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If no blood is drawn, then you administer an extraction of the affected part using the instrument called the "gestic" which is subtle and of the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If you forget the gesture, it is fine; otherwise, you administer the extraction of the affected part using a subtle and small number of doublings.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	If you do not forget the gesture for this, then you make a cannula of aram and enter the tip of the cannula into the opening of the anus and close it at the end of the cannula with wax and olive oil so that it is not scratched except for the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And if you extract from the top of the ventricle, three or four watched eyes come out, as follows:
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If you do not forget in this procedure, you catch the halo of the alum or the veil with the affected parts, one at a time, and place it on the end of the ray, and then gently blow over that corner of the decentent.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And if you enter it into the anus for convenience, and remove the anus of the moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	If none of the causes are forgotten, which have been reported, then you cut at that point where it is painful to touch, either for an abscess or an hernia.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The hand of the wound is that you cut at the beginning of the vein of the sephasic, extracted from the second hand of the virtue of the patient, and then make that cezer between your hands and convert the aurelha into parts of it, and for a small fissure in the edge of the aurelha, you must let out the blood in the place where it is most painful.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	If the fissure of the lunar figure is within the foot, and the foot has wasted away, remove that if you can with appropriate instruments; and at that time, cut quickly and cure it within the foot that has been healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the abscess is one of the greasy ones that have grown and are inflamed, then you administer the cure and extract it; but if you do not obey your appointment, then you should take subtle tincture according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	When administering care to that wound of that part which was caught in the thicket.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not do this when you think that part has already been moistened by the steam of the thicket, and pause there for a while, and take out those with your fingers or with a gentle touch, or if you have to cut it, then it will be easier to extract it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that was inserted in the thicket used for condiment, and fill the thicket with old cloth, and put the water on that thicket where the water is, and if for anything else you forget, then so be it; and otherwise, take a few peyrass and leons according to the length of the same, and heat them in the fire, and place one of those in the entrance of the patient's thicket and thrust it over a peice of that part and percussia am another peyra over the peyra that is dintz the thicket.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Then do not stop this until all the water is forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	When the gout has been dried out and you have taken it with paper or cloth, and then place one end of it in the anus and extend the other end outside until it is burning and the pain of the gout has subsided.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And as many times as possible enter the vagina with a piece of cloth and a gauze, and press it against the extrauterine urethra.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the removal of an animal that has entered the anus, if it is small, use gentle pressure and a warm solution as instructed in the division; but if it is large and causes pain in the abdomen, administer the removal of the intestines and testicles, and determine the cause of the pain from all other causes that may be found in the anus.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the removal of a worm born in the anus, when you treat that worm as instructed in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not satisfy your curiosity, keep the anus moist with the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If here any cause of the gallstones is found, take that one by the thumb or index finger, otherwise do not take it, and if no cause is found, take a catheter and insert it into the large intestine, and this is the form of the gallbladder:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	When the extremity is gently inserted into the ear according to the amount of pain it suffers from the injury; and then apply a little of that which is suitable for relief, and make a few circular motions, until all the vermes are forced out.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey my instructions, then you will plead and close in the circuit of the canula as they have said; then administer distillations which have already spread the antiparasitic in the treatment of worms, and you will find it in the chapter of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And is your effusion the one that funds the medicinal oils in the ear with this instrument of which this is the form of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make that of silver or of gold, straight, in which there is a small hole, and it will be easier to use.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so it is when it is placed in the cavity of the canula of continence here where it may be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and gently cover the extremity of the ear with it, and place a little oil in the cavity of the ear, or from some herb, or whatever medicine you want in the canula — and that is in the ear —, and gently insert the ray into the ear and press on the other hand that one which has been compressed in the ear when the oil is expelled in the cavity of the ear and the injury feels the oil.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When something is wrapped in the bile, it has already been burned by a small fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And remember that the cause which is distilled in the bile is not too impure, for it does not suffer from the bile.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of worms in the bile.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some worms are found in the intestines of older people and have been found in the intestines of men, worms in the bile caused by poison or by no meat; and this worm is found in the prey of the liver which does not feel the weather, and some are found in the deformed parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the prey of the liver, which does not understand the weather, is in the most difficult cases of difficult treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And if you can understand the weather in that case, cover the bile of the thigh with the sun and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see apparent puffing, open that and sprinkle with that fine powder which is the form of this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the one in which the smallest latitude is, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the excretion is of two lemons per so that it does not cause discomfort to the ears.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	If warts appear on the skin or in the flesh of the foot, then you can use fine needles and apply them with great ease when there is no more flesh left.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	If warts appear on the outer part of the foot, then you can use a fine needle and heat it up a little, and then insert it into the flesh of the foot.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	If you feel that the treatment is becoming more difficult due to fatigue, try to increase the pressure on the foot; and remember not to hurt the nerves of the foot.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then stop in the foot for a while before the second amount of Egyptian oil that you have wrapped around the foot; and make sure to do this every few days when you are sure that the plague has consolidated; or if you pull out any and immerse it in water and powder it over the sore and use it from there; and if the foot becomes infected, then make sure you don't pull out the same one and replace it with another one that you wrap around the foot as red as possible, when the infection is cured; and take care of it inside to make it healthy again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If one has a flow of bile, submerge sponges or sheets in warm water and place them over the abdomen, and use another cure that restricts the flow of bile, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of conjunctivitis, which ends in the eyes.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Conjunctivitis occurs in the eyes due to certain humors, some of which are moist and some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must have those thin sheets or cloths, and cut them into strips of the desired width, and place them over the areas to be treated.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain in the flow of bile, then you should cauterize those am cauteri lenticular subtly.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the incisions and wet strips are returned to the area after returning any cause of those strips; and when the cauterized areas are burned, those strips do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	This appears to be a medieval medical treatise in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The text describes a remedy for swelling in the eyelids that
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	When there is swelling in the eyelids, it may be caused by a variety of factors, and for this reason, it is called "grandfather's gout.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	When there is an addition of thick moisture in the outer corner of the eye and outside.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is that it is considered proper if the increase is due to water that appears in the outer corner of the eye and is not good for all parts; and the cause of this is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, pay attention to that fissure in the latitude, and withdraw it as much as possible from that part, and suspend it on that point and descend it as much as possible.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you do not see the beginning of the wound if you do not push that it penetrates the eyelid little by little, then there is no cause for this in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, you adjust it with suture; and care for that after it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer badly for that, as you restore the part and make it look like skin.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the increase is declining in the parts of the eyelid, you must superficially cut those parts, and then close the opening with sutures, another that you prescribe for the beginning, and press it on the entire part, and if the eyelid is elongated due to the incision, then you will not notice any cause for this.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	When preparing for the incision, wash the hands with salted water; and care for the location that is where the blood will enter that is healthy.
Capitol .x.	The text you provided is not in the same style or language as the
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The cure for the eye is to wash the eyelid with water.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	If gray hairs are formed in the eyelids, and especially in children, they worsen the appearance of those and cause discomfort to them; and they cannot see the clarity of the sun because of this, as some wrinkles gather around those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And have you ever noticed that those wrinkles appear on the face all the time, and especially when they are sleeping; and then on the eyelids of those after waking up, which already have inflammation, and an increase in redness appears in the eyes; and if you touch the area with your hand, you feel a burning sensation.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And an operation that is often used in the area where the leg stops, and also stops the drip of blood, and makes a circle according to the quantity of cartilage that contains in total part, and also stops it over that and presses on the eyelids with your hand for the whole time so that there is additional burning in the outer edge of the circle, and the fissure is not greater than the fissure made in flapotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	When you are about to cut the abdomen, first clean the area with a disinfectant solution, then make an incision according to the shape of the white glass vessel.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then remove the clothes that you have folded between the thighs, and separate them into two parts, one on the left and one on the right, until it is dry.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure you do not adjust in the incision so that the sweat does not reach the hole and causes damage to it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see your arteries at the beginning of the incision, then adjust the incision with a small piece of cloth easily within the process of cutting; and take out the ones that have been said; and submerge the clothes in water and wet them, and put them over the place and stretch those am polvils.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then take out the saline solution and remove that in the cavity of the incision, because that is what remains of that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that within which it becomes healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If you happen to be in the place of the acupuncture point, then you should treat that area with plasters made from plants that are known for their healing properties.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol, xi. This is a date format, where 
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	From the hands of the hymen, which is a reference to the vaginal opening in women. The phrase "de mani
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyes of the labia are red, swollen, and filled with tears, as if they were constantly crying, and the skin of the lips is smooth and soft, it is a sign of damage to the labia that is called tactinir of the labia. To treat this, you can use four methods: either by cauterization using hot iron; or with medicinal cauterization according to what is written in the capital of cauterization; or by making incisions and sutures; or by cannas according to what you have said.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	When closing the space between the patient's thighs, place a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. If the eyelid is converted to the left side, it is not correct; if it is converted, do not do it; otherwise, make a hole in that part where the pus is located further than the eyelid, and let the hole penetrate into that part, and then it will be - the margin of the eyelid where the lashes are, the lashes themselves, and pull out the filer from the parts where the lashes are in the eyelid, and convert it to the parts further than the eyelid.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	If there is a spot in the corner of the eyelid where the lashes are adjusted to the incidence of the lacrimal major entering the lacrimal groove; and if you extract the filer and hold the eyelid open with small combs or blades, and then cover it over the eyelid, and it will be as if a candle flame is held close.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important that the figure follows the amount of swelling of the eyelid, which has already been differentiated in men, among which those who are indicated that a large quantity of swelling should be inserted into the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	When there is cold humors that infiltrate the lines of the eyes, and it starts from the larger tear duct to the smaller one, then... (Please provide the full sentence for a more accurate translation)
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your incision is as sharp as the king's biggest finger, then... (This sentence suggests that the incision should be very precise and sharp to ensure a successful procedure)
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the nail in one of the angles of the abdomen, and excise the entire area, and adjust the stitches as close as possible to the lips of the mouth or subtle furrow of the chin, and remove the sutures, and make it adhere if it is superfluous over two folds of the skin for any reasons you want, but if not, do not cure. (This sentence seems to be a description of a surgical procedure, possibly related to a cosmetic or reconstructive surgery)
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And you should change the sutures of the lips after three to four days, and take care of it. (This sentence suggests that the patient should follow up with their healthcare provider to have the sutures removed and to ensure proper healing)
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, change the plaster of your stitches, and take care of that as it dries and tightens, for the eyelid becomes red, you must use the bandage of the plaster and its addition, but fewer stitches are better, and so do not taxanir. (This sentence seems to be providing advice on how to care for a wound or surgical site that has been closed with plaster)
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	When it comes to the matter of the thighs, there is indeed concern about the operation, and there is no fear in this matter.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	There is another method in taxmir, and it involves putting something over the eyelid that resembles a dead fly's eye, and then raising the eyelid in three points, separated by this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to have the points, and if it does not hurt, then you should take a string and tie it around the hair that has been cut, and insert that into the eye of the figure, and then enter the other fiel prop le lacrimal major, and the other fiel second prop le lacrimal mendre, and adjust between the ties so that all the fiels are equal, and then raise the entire codena over the one that has been put in as they have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the lips of the wound am sutura, and cure that which is healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you happen to have an abscess, you must clean that abscess or that wound with your hand, and with the same herbs and ointments, and with the same medicine.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	When some eyes are affected by the eyelid that they have been converted into, then you should use the one that has been mentioned for this gout; less suture is needed in those cases than in artificial ones.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma: This means "To cut the cannabis is the second form of this." In
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	This means: "And you cut the eyelid and divide the figure that is behind it according to what I have discovered; and for art's sake, make holes in cannabis or in subtle astelas of which the length is the same as the length of the eyelid and the latitude is the same as the latitude of the spatum.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	When you have previously incised at the ends of some parts, you will find the threads there.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Add a little subtleness to the gout that is superfluous on the eyelid of the hollow, and compress the veins of some parts with a firm constriction, and let it remain there for several days, so that the coda for the stricture dies and is rejected and becomes infected if it is touched by anyone.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If you are delayed, you can cut the gout with the horn, and cure the plague within it if it is cured.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not hang down.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of doses that you make following this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 and has the quantity of the longitude and latitude, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol. xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the hair is dry, it makes a twisting movement in the eyelid because the hair is tight.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard and rough and sharp on the eyelids, you perform the operation in it as if you were holding a subtle one and pressing on the subtle edge of the leopard, and as if you were adjusting the ends of it and the points of the nails in your hand with great care.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	When the length of the fingers is equal to the width of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then, if you want, cut another finger on the side, and clean the ends of that one.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then, place the patient in the upright position, and use the sole of your shoe as a scale to determine the size of your work, which is a small and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then, introduce the needle into the corner of the eye that requires reinforcement, and make it penetrate deeply into the eyelid until it reaches the outer edge of that part of the eyeball.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then, pull the eye out through the socket and introduce it into the cavity, and there should be one or two or three eyes, not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then, pull the eye out through the socket and insert it into the cavity, but take care not to pull it out if the eyeball is inside the eyelid.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If you are pulled into the cavity and do not pull the eyeball out, you will pull the eyelid into the parts where you have cut the finger that you have made, into which the eyeball is pulled by the truss.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	When you look at the wound, four of the fingers and the thumb are best to use, and gently push on it. Then close it with two days or three, until it sticks to the right place and covers over the good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the wound is too small, you should adjust a longer natural gauze and elevate it over the wound, or if it looks like it is not long enough to fit properly in that space, then you should lift it up.
Capitol .xiii.	Capital. This is likely a heading or title for the next section of the text
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Regarding the treatment of what appears in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is ecchymosis in the wound, and there is contraction of the eyelid when it is compressed, either on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of plague or cut, or cauterization, and this is called ecchymotic or natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of plague or cuts or cauterization, or for appearance's sake like that.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manicure of the operation in it be that you push that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place on it as there is between those one machine of cloth of it, and tie those when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not think that you use of cure of it from the causes which dry them, I advise you; rather if you make sure returns to return to the exudate pus that no time in the fire will have.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which mollifies the flesh as is the fig, and moisten with water in which are coitals alta and semensa of it, or engulf dyaquilon, which is liquefied am the oil, and immerse in that the machine, and cure that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce all the engage which is not solid according to the form which fire has at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which has been said is not any rectification of the cushion that does not return the form of the place according to what fire has given at the beginning.
Capitol .xiiii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a language similar
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	I apologize, but it seems that the text you provided is incomplete or not in a recognizable language. Could you please provide the full text or clarify which language you would like me to translate from? I'm here to
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	I apologize, but the text you provided is still not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages or symbols. If you could provide the full text or clarify which language you would like me to translate from, I'd be happy to help.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	I apologize, but the text you provided is still not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages or symbols. If you could provide the full text or clarify which language you would like me to translate from, I'd be happy to help.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	I apologize, but the text you provided is still not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages or symbols. If you could provide the full text or clarify which language you would like me to translate from, I'd be happy to help.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	I apologize, but the text you provided is still not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages or symbols. If you could provide the full text or clarify which language you would like me to translate from, I'd be happy to help.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	If the figure of the eyelid returns to its original position, and if not, take the mirror and place it on that side, and then convert the eyelid, and make the cuts in the eyelid's edge further away.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the cuts of the two angles of the incision, which you made inside when they were running, and the angle of one of them within which the figure of that one is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek: the ladder.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And it holds the flesh of that amount by the quantity of the leg that is further away from the eye, so that it does not tear the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it adjusts the separated parts and ties them with that thread; and it cares for those that have said about the mollifying medicines and the cataplasms when they are healthy.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If you scrape or cut or cauterize, then you should make a flat cut on the eyelid's edge according to what is previously specified.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And separately cut the skin between the two lips that they have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the cure of gout when it is removed or placed, that runs in its operation, according to the form of gout, and that is in the form of different waves.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artificer makes every time an engine in each hand that is possible to return the figure to its natural form or part of it, and that one is according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the larger possessions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol. xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens in some men that the eyelid is solidified and placed under the albumin of the eye, and is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore you must enter the extraction of the ray from the eyelid, and raise it therein, or extend it to the upper part.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And if you insert the adhesion under a fine sputum, which is not of acuteness of the incisions, having obtuse a small part so that the operation is not troubled by this, and remain the sputum that does not affect the eye with its acuteness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	If your incision is showing that the adhesion is easily removable, then return the eyelid back to its original form and make sure the entire adhesion is cured.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And if you put in the water, salted water, of which you wash; or distill in it, dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And separate the eyelid from the water, and place your hand over the water, and the third day use caustrative substances within which it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of the eyebrow and elevation of the eyelid.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the eyebrow is made up of two layers, one nervous and resembling a thin, hard substance; or it is not nervous, resembling a white, damp substance, which when touched with the finger, or attempted to be drawn out with the nail, is separated and the nail does not stick in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And if you apply the specials only to the larger eye, then it covers the vision and prohibits the light and movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	When the hand of the worker is in the area of the body where the hernia is located, and they perform the incisions, and raise the eyelid to your eye, and close the wound with sutures, and extend the stitching to a few parts of the body.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then insert an eyelet and enter it into the same orifice of the horse, or cow, or calf, or sheep, or double the end of the eyelet little by little and place it in the corner of the needle, and push it through the needle; and extend it to the parts on your body, and clean the hole with the tip of the needle that will touch the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And do you follow that with the eyelet into the hole of the penis.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you insert the romanent into the pit of the lacrimal gland subtle or with small forfexes, and examine the flesh of the lacrimal natural to see if it will not cause continuous discharges of mucus.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	When someone asks if you have seen the sun on the skin that has been extended or tightened, say yes, and approximately how far it extends, and this is the form of this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	This line can be translated as: "Ensure that the ointment does not touch the outer layer of the skin and that it is applied to the rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	When the incision is made in the hip, a few drops of blood or a point of pain is felt, and it should be cared for the next day; and that part should be covered with a dressing to prevent it from getting infected.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the wound is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it placed in that place, then this type of wound is cured by medicine, and it is healed as you are advised in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to open that incision, then you should open the space between the thighs and place a thin knife of sharp edge according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If it happens that the wound is cleaned and closed and enters into another day, then you should distill from your mouth in the hip of the point of pain or the point of the knee or the point of the elbow, and cover the wound with a dressing.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And repeat over that the operation until it is completely healed, unless that contrary to the stitch, which should be in the hip, then you should open that, and cover the stitch at the beginning, and cure as soon as it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And furthermore, repeat your operation over that same part until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the tear of the lacrimal gland is noticed in the eye due to great pain, it should be suspended with a piece; and cut out that part, and do not leave the incision so that no tears of lachryms come out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And furthermore, distill in the lacrimal well and apply it within when it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incisions of aloe and of the water that comes from the adjusted flesh in the knee.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some of the scars in the knees are made from the flesh of aloe, and they are placed over the pupil or under the eyelids, or they are cut over the eyelids and the edges are sewn together with a thread of balaustra.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on that side is what you need to stop the pain in the thigh; and cut the scars of that and sew them all together with the convenient pieces of flesh, and use a forceps or a pair of tweezers; and cut the flesh at the beginning when everything is finished within the incision, and keep that from coming out of the wound during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	If your incision is on the part where the surgeon has recommended to make the incision in the umbilicus, or if small petits forfexes are used which are attached to the abdomen according to the shape of the patient's belly, then proceed as follows:
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is covered with that powder, you must fill the hole with salt, or drop some of the powdered rogue on it, resembling the corrosive medicines, and stop over the hole deformed as it was before, ensuring not to get cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if you are affected by gout and the doctor gives you a cautery, and you fear cautery, then clean the wound and treat that cautery with this that yields to that cautery, and repeat over that during the operation until it is healed, and seemingly put something in the flesh that accumulates in the wound of this speciality.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But may I advise you that all cures of the wound by natural or accidental means, iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	1. Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	it is customarily called gout by doctors. The cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body cause joint pain, and the feet are often affected. The swelling in the feet increases over time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary to start by considering the foot in which the cold humors are thick and not another type of swelling. You should then collect that sable.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And is it that you command the patient to hold their leg up, and suspend those veins above their head as much as possible; and this one of subtle duplication according to this form?
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And these two onci are gradually raised in a cup according to this form.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And they are then tightly closed around those subtle veins, with subtlety, and remove the sand hour by hour, until you see those veins becoming more moist from the swelling and becoming reddish.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And make sure you do not touch the swelling at the ends of the stump; and if your operation is done under the sun, and there are no other veins, then keep your operation closed until those veins are filled.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	When you have completed, then you must distill in the cold well or roof that is closest to the wound so that the coldness of it may reduce the pain that is increasing.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible to obtain all of this in one day, and you must apply it to the pain that causes the pain for several days until the pain is reduced and you are sure that there will be no relapse of gout.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this over the other hand when it is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol, Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing the pain in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure the nose with cauterization or with acute medicine following the narration of the pain and it is not healed, you do not engage in it but rather press on the gout with the maturity of the pain, and remove all the humidity that is in it and it pours in when it is discovered that the bone is inside.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when it is discovered that the bone is inside and sometimes in the corruption or blackening, you should cut it with a tool of this kind:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a hard cap, and it is made of iron, and its shape is similar to the one that is cut by points of lima or aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Then place that over the corrupt part of the bone, and rotate it between the fingers, and press your thumb gently as you know that this cropy is being sawn.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	If it has some cracks, and then restore the place caused by dehydrating and tightening agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the place is consolidated and good flesh grows on it, and the body of the sore and painful part is separated from the corpse in 40 days, and it is not renewed or healed, then you should know that it is cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	However, do not enter the wound unless you reduce the fissure to the shape of a nose, and follow this method: and it is that you will discover from second to second with iron or sharp medicine, and when you discover the bone, then you hold third in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	When the external part of the horse's shoe is cut off, it should be cut as many times as possible within the extremity of the toe.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place it over the bone, and make it the lacrimal; and along your thumb, and a little of the flesh, and open your hand and all the bones that enter until they penetrate the whole bone, and it will feel the pain as if it were burning with fire.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the place with medicinal cathartics that are drying as you need to.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and bone are enduring, you should put the matter that flows to the edges returns to its place, so it is placed over the joint.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reducing the prominence of the thumb.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the thumb is prominent in its entirety and does not occur in the document or diminution, you should loosen the joint, and follow it, and follow the ventosa in the cervix with scarification and succession; and place a liniment on the thumb that is made of acatra, aloe, and ensem and sarcocolla, and strengthen the emplaustre on the thumb with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the hand of the pollies is what you grasp from the skins of the lambs, and each skin is doubled into four plates; and make those skins.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then pause those on one over the other according to the quantity of that which has the most need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And stretch over those with an arm of skin strong and firm; and repeat the winds on its sharp points; and take away the winds and straighten the day and the night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If you want to soften the ligament, then it is necessary that it be straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And take away the ligament at day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the belly has already been reduced, then so be it, and otherwise, you repeat the plaster on the skins and the stricture and the winds inside until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the significance of the eminence of the uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uvea tunic, and it becomes prominent and proceeds outside the eyelids as if a grain of sand, and its shape is distorted for that reason, and you want to inscribe it, then perform the operation on it as has been recommended, which is to enter the tail of the agula into the socket of the uvea from where you started, and place another tail there that is double the part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and straighten the first tail according to its disposition; and inscribe the location of the double fiel and lift that part of the uvea in the circuit of the agula, and stretch that mot.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the girdle and place it over the infused wool in the album of honey and let it enter where the thread comes out of the vine.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for the wool as this comforts that which enters and may be cured if it is infected.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some veins are found in the entire part of the circle of the drap that enters the wool, and it is perforated by a subtle hole that comes to the preon of the wool, and runs the humidure albuginea, and descends the wool and enters as much.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then stretch it so that it is cured.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This malady which is called gout is not but a disease which is adjusted in the wool like water descending and not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The greatest labor in the work is that you make the malady seize on the cloth that is worn and dyed, and then press the head so that it is in your hands of two parts and dry that which comes out of that part where you see the gout reach the parts behind, and it should be dry and not descend, and the lum should be left, and this malady would see its causes as they were.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not come down below, you know that it is wet.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent is not prepared, as they have said, you will have to cut the urethra between your own thighs and then insert a thin pin subtly and above all, place it over the cornea of the eyeball in the eye socket (within the located area), enter if the suture is not tightened.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	If the suture is not tightened, you will have to distill water in the tail that you have mixed with water and honey, in which you have already built honey and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And if the cure is not found, then enter if it is healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the wet coming from the tail.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	As they have said the specifics of the wet in the division and which convenes to perforate, you will have to do that for the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You must make sure that you cut the urethra between your own thighs over a chair and the honey tail, the strong one.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And if you pause a little below the eyelid of the eye that is causing the pain, if the one that causes the pain is the left one; or if you pause a little above it, if the one that causes the pain is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And if you hold the eyelid of the eye that is causing the pain with your thumb, if the one that causes the pain is the left one; or if you hold the eyelid of the eye that is causing the pain with your index finger, if the one that causes the pain is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And if you pause the end of the thumb at the top of the cornea for the largest part of the ray in the album of the eye that is causing the pain, and if you hold it with your other hand, hold the eyelid up and down with your other hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And if you insert your finger into the album of the eye that is causing the pain and feel that the thumb has already passed through due to the pressure.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And if you measure the size of the thumb at the corner of the eye that is causing the pain and see that the measure is equal to the distance of the pupil inside the end of the furrow, and it is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the pupil with the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	When you arrive at the location where the poison is located, and then you place your hand on another part of the body, and if the poison descends, you will see the leg that has been affected by the poison, and you should immediately stop the treatment.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	If you repair a little; therefore, if the poison descends, you should immediately stop that other vein that has not been cut off.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	When you are safe and have not descended, you should immediately extract it with ease, and remove as much as possible, and dissolve in clear salt from gum a small amount of water and wash the wound with it; and stop or soak or infuse into rose oil and albuminous serum and ligua to cleanse the wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	We know those who are of our time who pause over that which has been consumed from the albuminous serum.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey my advice to treat the wound for its hardness — which is common among men whose skin is hard — you should know that this is the form of the sponge that I recommend, which is called alberid and looks like this:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	When you have pierced that joint, do not last the hole in your arm, and if it does not come out, then make a small cut below the surface.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then enter the medicine according to what they have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must prepare the complement of your work, which is placed on the thighs of the patient in a dark room, and is prohibited for all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Then pause the gout in nature so that it is lined with its own nature and does not cause the hand to go to the right or left of the whole.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And make the limb according to its position on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then leave that in that dark room and expel the visible flame, and make it see some causes, and return the limb on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not force the gout in the hour of the priests or too much the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It is necessary that you give the gout to it with water that falls on it with great and violent regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess occurs near the skin, it is necessary to open it, as it will release its contents within seven days and can be corrected if needed.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Do you have the patient's consent to examine their mouth and throat for the next few days, as it is necessary for the treatment of their illness?
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And if their speech becomes less clear and they speak slowly due to their condition, it is necessary to seek medical attention.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in alchemy, there is no excuse for the disciple's lack of vision, and you must be careful with the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been discovered in our art that some of those who are alchemists, and alchemy says that a fire is made in the Airy magazine with the substance that succeeds the water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I do not believe that you have seen this in our land, nor has it been written by any alchemist of the ancient times; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of Aquarius that are over those, which do not know those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. The tips of these needles are made of iron or steel, and their sharpness is achieved through a triangular cutting edge, with the sharp point at the extreme end, similar to that of a knife.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the treatment of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various hardenings of flesh, some of which have a certain cause that is similar to that of scorpion sting or polyp peys; and this malady is called polypus, which is similar to the one represented by that peys.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of the hardening, it is cancerous tissue, black in color; and of the nose, it is that the flesh of a lion is not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these hardenings of flesh, the lion's flesh is not cancerous or malignant, and it is necessary to make the malady seize between your hands and place it on the sun, and humidify the nar in those hardenings.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	When extracting that part, and approaching it as you have understood from the fine gout of that part within which you know that the whole flesh is remaining; if Roman of that cause of the which the abscess is possible, then you should take that as one of the subtle instruments for facilitating entry into that which the Roman understands of that cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If Lord may sin or accident have happened to the cautery, then you should pause at that place; whether it is one of the malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize that within which is sanctified and the whole cavities are remaining.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And if it be in the nose that it has been inserted, then see where it goes and how it agrees or disagrees with you.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and there is humidity within the palate, then you know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not follow after that place, then you know that there is nothing in the flesh of the bones of the nose which has not been permeated by abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should cover the part of the body where there is any swelling, wet it with a soft cloth, and pause between each portion of the said or mens, and then open the thigh and insert an extremity of the foot into the arm or another cause that may be possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And suppose that this has been done, that the sweet odor of it permeates the canals of the arms, and is placed over the child's groin, so that many eyes see this action made on children in schools, and there is no cause for that which he wants to do.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the foot, one that goes over the nose and the other that rubs on the nose, and then apply firm pressure to the flesh of the feet that are in the foot, and make sure that the flesh is already in the feet.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the foot, and place it in the nose for about three days or more, and make sure that the entire swelling comes out that is rubbing on the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	When approaching the end of the cause, pause in the nose for one night with a piece of cloth to see if it is cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you need medicine, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the instrument used by the barber to cut hair with which are essential oils and medicines in the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish, make a closed cannula like a tube, and the cannula of the instrument should be placed at the end of the cautery and be flat, discovered; in which you will hold it when you scrape the bottom of the foot, with the one that holds you when you scratch with oil or water that you want from the suets and causes suctiblas.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	 E these purges are valuable: recipe for castor oil, white brush, ginger, and peppermint, dewberries, long pepper, eschalot, and spicery of anna unc. see how they contain succus and caul, and their pills are made from succus, and the water is drunk in the mouth's nars, sent into the jaws.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	These are found in the extra-nasal regions.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Sneezes that are visible are made of these elements in the extra-nasal regions, and they are magnificent and open on certain days until the day that you can see the regard of the eye.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore you have inserted this at the beginning of the appearance of the foot, and you have acknowledged all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause over the spot or cautery or medicine that was in place of the one that was needed for the patient.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed and arrives when it is magnificent, consider if it is being stitched, hard, of black color and with few feelings, do not touch that iron which is called the cranial Apostema; four eyes watch over this Apostema, as it is inserted by the great malice of that which has.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the Apostema is of lion's flesh and not black, and sometimes it is possible to incise in all of that, then remove the coyssas and incise that part with fear, and cure the place as it is exsicced and enters when it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Regarding the suture of the nose and lips and the forehead when the continuity is dissolved by pus or for appearance's sake.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you find a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confirmations are found in that operation but in other people's cases.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you come across any of those causes that you consider to be cold humors affecting the body, and you adjust the lips of the affected area with sutures, and carefully enter that part which is now healthy.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of the solution for continuity are already separated, and each one is healthy, then you should carefully remove each part of its abdominal cavity within which there is no pain.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if you adjust the lips of the solution with sutures and strengthen those, and over them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and incense, and place a pinch of consolidated plaster on it, or another of the consolidated plasters, and press that edge for two or three seconds, and then remove that and exchange the plaster and press that part which are the wounds if they have been separated, and carefully enter that part which is now healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The hand that holds the suture is that you add the solution for continuity or as needles have been recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution for continuity as you and make sure.
Capitol .xxvii.	I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text "Capitol .xx
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	This sentence appears to be in Spanish and can be translated as: "From the causes that enter into the lips of the teeth in the parts of the dents." However, this translation might not make much sense in English context. If you could provide more context or clarify what
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	This sentence can be translated as: "Warts that appear on the faces of some men in the parts of the lips of their teeth, and some are smaller and others are larger." However, this translation might not make much sense in English context. If you could provide more context or clarify what you are trying to convey, I can provide a more accurate translation.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	This sentence appears to be in Spanish and can be translated as: "Therefore, convert the lips and gums of each of those warts, and then fill the space with the remedy that is applied, and clean the area with a solution that is antiseptic, within which it is cured, within which it is sutured, within which it is stitched." However, this translation might not make much sense in English context. If you could provide more context or clarify what you are trying to convey, I can provide a more accurate translation.
Capitol .xxviii.	I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text "Capitol .xx
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	This sentence appears to be in Spanish and can be translated as: "Of the incision made on the adjusted flesh in the gingiva." However, this translation
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Granre of veguadas is upon the carnal gingiva adjusted, which the ancients called albulus, then cover that you suspend on that hand or that you hold with that hand and insert it into the wound, and lessen the pain to run or to sanctify.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And pause over the old scar or another type of stitching or excision.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that carn returns, insert the second one, and cauterize it, so that the cauterization does not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of reason of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the parts of the gums and between the gums that are adjusted with rough, hard, and some veins are of blacks and are painful citrin or verdant and enter that in the gum is corruption and are painful the teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And cover that you make the thighs between your legs and place the head of it in the highest part, and reduce the teeth in those parts where appear those hard veins and causes a semblance of sand within which none of them are similar to any other, and this is of the negro and citrinita and of the others that are mondificated.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If there is still pain in the beginning of the reason, then so be it; otherwise, you will repeat the reason over those parts on another day and the second and third time until you reach the end of what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You should know that teeth require various types of cuts and figures, depending on the preparation for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For so that the razors can reach the part of the tooth that is not covered by the razor, and these forms of razors are those that you must prepare in advance, which you will use the most:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Chapter on the Eradication of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cover that you cure the tooth of its pain with total care and time, as there is no cause that supplies the vein with blood when it is extracted, which becomes submerged within the vein when the extraction is excused in the eradication of the tooth.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Moreover, when the tooth is about to be extracted, you must be certain that the painful tooth is the one that sends the pain through the gum and that it is in a healthy tooth, and you will extract that and if the pain does not cease after the painful tooth and the diseased tooth are extracted, we have seen this during our operations on beards.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	When speaking in front of many people for good conversation or to show off, and placing the hand of the patient between their teeth that you hold, and then touching the tooth second with your other hand, which does not touch the other hand, nor cause more pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if you do not forget, take one of those instruments, and place it at the end of that part with ease and effort to remove the catheter that was inserted at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is swollen or inflamed, you must cover that part with your hand and gently stretch it to the end of the finger without causing pain in the moment of your compression over that tooth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And operate very carefully with excision in the circuit of the entire gum part and keep your strength so that it does not touch that tooth and pull it out of place, and return to the patient's leg for the worst pain than the first one.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what these barbers do in their practice and audacity over the eradication of them, since they do not administer what they have been recommended; four witnesses bring about those very large women who are difficult to treat that are not trinqued, and all their features are improved, or some of those, or that you extract that tooth from the bone of the mandible as four witnesses have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the elimination of the pain is washed with the mouth or with salt that I see.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If you have any fevers, as seen in the past, then take some quantity of mustard and rub it over the skin, and if that does not relieve the pain, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tongs should be subtle, as those that cause the tooth to start with long extrusion, thin handle and large, so that they are not bent when you need to operate on them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And it is seen that the handle is large when you enter and that when you stretch them out they are thin extractions.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And there are points of Indian iron that are points of wide extrusion and in the extrusions of those there are teeth of the kind that some ones have inserted into others and stretched by strong contraction, and some of the extrusions of those are the form of the beak of a goose which has been given the name cicada, it is hard, and they are of strong contraction.
Capitol .xxxi.	I apologize, but I am unable to provide a translation for "Cap
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Translation:
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When it is necessary to remove the tooth that is causing pain, you should pause over the location for about an hour or two until that location becomes softened; and then enter with your fingers or hold the extramittats of those that are assembled at the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, in the form of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The first line can be translated as "The symptoms of their joint pain are like a lime or almond." This suggests that the symptoms are similar to those of a lime or almond, but it's important to note that this is a literal translation and the context may
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	This line can be translated as "And if you do not obey my instructions and use these forceps or needles, then you will cut on the skin and destroy all the flesh and insert the instrument that is called this one, which is a small lever of this kind:". This suggests that the user should follow the instructions provided by the speaker and use the forceps or needles carefully to avoid damaging the skin and flesh. The instrument that is being referred to is not specified in the text.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	This line can be translated as "And if it has a thick end and is not hollowed out, then it is not suitable." This suggests that the instrument being referred to should have a thin end and be hollowed out in order to be suitable for use. The context of this sentence is not clear without additional information.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	This line can be translated as "Therefore, if the skin is forgotten, then so; and otherwise, help me with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extramittance in which there is any thick part:". This suggests that the speaker is providing instructions on how to use certain instruments for the purpose of treating joint pain. The text goes on to describe the form of the first instrument, which is a triangular extramittance with a thick part.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it is of a triangular shape and has a subtle end point.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And I have other instruments that I will use in shaving teeth; for this purpose, I have made an instrument of the size of this one and it is as follows:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the rounded end of a tortoise or short, which is any large one, and not curved by itself because it is not triangular.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you know that these teeth tools are similar to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled artisans and subtle in the art, are lost because they follow what this signifies the operation and different diseases; these are of the diseases for which the ancients did not have or use any specific instrument, due to the forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is curved, or if it is swollen, then use your hand over that in its place as follows: this is the convenient instrument and forceps that have been mentioned in the extraction of teeth, and helps you with the handle of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any large piece small by small, and it is tied or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak through which the bone of all has a hole; and then restore the place with the appropriate medical means as follows:
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When a small crack is found in the bone, you should identify that crack and its cause, and treat it within the time it takes for the bone to heal.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent and do not follow the natural course of the jaw, and especially in women and particularly in religious women, therefore you should consider: if a tooth is nothing else but another tooth, and there is no possibility of extraction or linament, then treat that one; rather than it being annexed to another tooth, treat that one with this instrument of which this is the form; and it seems like it is from a horse's hoof, and is made of Indian iron of sharp extration.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And is your incision at the place where you insert it for many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and not being another part of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the limb, then make a lima of that with a lima of Indian iron of which this is the form.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	When all is said and done, it is all of iron and the marginal margin; and it is made of points that are like needles, those that cause pain in the joints, those that are sharp and pointy, so that no other tooth can be broken or chewed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line up those on the face, and use them like razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is broken and the tongue is affected, then you must cover that with something like a piece of cloth that has been soaked in water and wrung out, so that the tongue does not become dry and the word does not corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital.xxxiii. (This is a heading or title, not a translation
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Restoration of broken teeth requires gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When broken teeth are caused by concussion and displacement due to percussion or thrusting, and the mallet cannot be tightened over it that hand, and you have treated that with surgical stitches, and your treatment has not been effective, then you should use gold wire that is not silver, and it will not rust in those that are strong and not silver, for silver turns green and becomes dirty over time, while gold does not change at all.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	If the wound is of such a delicate and gross nature according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the incision is that you grasp the wound with your hand and hold double of it between two healthy teeth, and as much as possible of the curvature of the wound between the unhealthy teeth, or if one or more, enter when the cloth comes to the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And carefully insert the dressing into the part of which you began, and tighten it with care and knowledge so that it is not uncomfortable.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	If your thread is tight at the place where you tighten the wound, you must cut the teeth that did not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And cut the excess of the wound on the forceps or tweezers, and attach them to any place where you can handle them, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the unhealthy tooth so that they do not cause damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And make it stand as if it were Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it slips or breaks, tighten that or those with another thread in the same way for the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of teeth and the figure of healthy teeth and rotten teeth, as shown in the following examples:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When it is necessary to return a tooth or teeth to their place in the gum, and they regenerate as recommended, they will remain strong.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is not possible without the help of an artist and a surgeon.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some bones are suitable for the purpose of cattle bones and are made in the form of teeth, placed in the place where the tooth lacks, strengthened as they have said, and remain strong for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the inscription of the language that is found in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This language that we see in the tongue some bones or teeth of an animal that is not natural to the mouth of that man, or accidental and accidental due to the plague that has already been established.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on this is that you open the mouth of the patient, and it exists there in the upper part; and raise the language tongue, and inscribe that language nerve according to the latitude within which the language of the tongue is released.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	When there is any pain or difficulty in that area, and it is for the consolidation of plague, then you should cut and separate that part within which the limb is incompletely separated and the nodosity has been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And keep in mind that it is not a joint fissure in the skin of the flesh and that it separates here the tendon and brings out the fluid from the sinus.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And wash the wound with warm water or with cold water or with rainwater; and then place your tongue on the lips; this is what holds the mouth closed in any way so that it is not consolidated by another view.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	When you see fluid from the sinus, place your hand over the area that has been incised; when the sinus drains, you should cauterize the area with a sharp pointed cautery that is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And that cure is for the other causes within which it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	From the removal of gallstones, place your tongue outside.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	When some swellings appear on the tongue, they resemble the small name that prohibits the tongue from performing its natural operation; and more it becomes magnified when it is swollen in the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in question is that which causes the tongue of the patient to stick out between the teeth and is considered an aphthous ulcer.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see the swelling of black or dark color and hard, which the patient does not feel pain in, do not touch that part.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is declining to whiteness, in which there is moisture, you should put the cotton on it, and insert a small amount of saliva under it, and insert the whole part; and if you notice at the time of your operation, you should pause for a moment, which is necessary, until the saliva is dry, because it is restricting the suture.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And when you return to your work, if you have washed it with a complement of the part, if it is dry and clean, and cares for that am the other care after this, if it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxvi.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language I can recognize or translate. It seems to be a mix of different languages or symbols. Could you please provide more context or check the source of the text? I'm here to help with information in English.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you remove the gallbladder from the abdomen, it consists of glands that are assembled like cotton, which become deformed and are known as doxorubicin-resistant malignant tumors. If these tumors have been diagnosed in division and are not healed, then you should consider if the apostemia is hard, of dark color, with few sensations, and in that case, do not touch that with your iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If the urine is dark and the bladder is large, do not touch that with your hand for the flow of the sac; rather, let that go inside its mature state, and either you or she will handle it herself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of a white color, like silver, and the surface of the skin is delicate, then that is what one should cover with a cloth.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation in this case depends on the outcome of your operation, whether the wound of the finger has healed completely or if it is still affected by some diminution; then close the leg with a stitch, and the head of the finger should be in its place, and bend the mouth of the finger, and the servant takes between his fingers the tongue of the finger further with an instrument noble of this kind:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	If it is made of silver or gold, and it is delicate like silk.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you put the tongue on and show it to you the wound, and cover that with your thumb, hold it there and pull it out of the hole as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you should take out of the tunics, and pay attention to that with the instrument of this kind:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is assembled like forceps, but the extramitties are twisted, so that the orifice of any of those is in the end of the other, with sharp teeth, which is of iron ingots.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	When this instrument is not at your disposal, insert it into the hole of that substance which is the form of this: If it is sharp for one part, it may be blunt for another part.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And if you have inserted honey, insert the other immediately after this hand-held instrument for insertion, and thus the insertion point of the thigh will be moistened with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When there is no flow of blood, wet the insertion point with water, using milk or olive oil as a substitute for the previous causes that entered when the blood flow stopped, and treat it accordingly if it becomes healthy.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some veins may be found in the other thighs or another part of the same ones, and insert them after those you have mentioned in the insertion point of honey-like instruments.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And if you have already treated a woman with an aphrodisiac that was born in the thigh of her mother, which aphrodisiac tended to be dark brown, with little sensation, which had closed the thigh of her mother, and the woman was breathing straight, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking and water, and had been pervaded by death if not two days or two nights, then insert the honey-like instruments into the other thigh.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The aposteme had already suffered so much that it had made two holes inside that it was bleeding through two cloths.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then, please excuse me and remain in one of them, and pull out that one, and tear off a piece of it, and take the other part of the large piece, and insert it into the wound of the other injury, and open the mouth of it, and chew on its tongue, and keep the incision in the aposteme.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then, take a large piece of it, and do not run out of it except for a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Indeed, the gout of that woman is very severe, and she has been drinking a lot of water, so please continue to insert the needle into the aposteme for a long time, and the other aposteme will take its place in that location, which is prolonged in that one.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then, please heat and cauterize the gout of that woman, so as to add more; and then, please walk around and do not clean what God did in that prophecy.
Capitol .xxxvii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not a complete sentence or
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	It seems like you're providing a separate line of text. Here's a possible translation:
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the throat, and it is long and narrow, then it is called a "gullet" by doctors; and if it is in the large and round part, then it is called a "bubble".
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the treatment is finished and you are still not cured, and sometimes it seems that the cauterization has already been removed from you and is subtle, then you should think that the intestine has been sewn in that which has been rounded; and if it is at that length, and it bleeds, of a dark color or black, and not to your liking, then you should think that the intestine has been sutured in that, and there is fear of the thigh.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that the second hand is longer and whiter than the one you told about, and you make the thighs straight and press the tongue with the instrument by which it is processed, and fix it in its place and insert it into one of two instruments, which are called in the incision of two melons.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And after reducing the belly or hernia to its cavity, and placing your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. And you have already opened the
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	After making the incision, use the one that has been recommended for the incision of two thorns, and care for that entrance as soon as it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the leg were painful due to the insertion of the needle, it is necessary to use an incision in the cauterization of the testicle, and the tip of the cauterist's finger in the testicle should not be anything but sharp and hard, and that you hold the top of the leg with your hand, and press the tongue of the instrument that they have said, and press with the water that they have told in the cauterization capital, and comfort that which is alive, and stop that without being too thick or subtle, and around that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	When the congestion of the cavity is such that the medicine can be inserted through the vagina, and the patient's thighs are placed on the table, and the mucus is placed on the lips of the patient for the intrinsic medicine to be applied, so that it does not cause any harm to the patient's groin and does not damage the patient.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And if you have the medicine at hand, and apply it over the uvula for the space of about an hour until you see that it is being degraded and dried out by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take the scalpel and wrap it around the end of the toe, and immerse the scalpel in the medicine, and insert the toe into the cannula that the scalpel adheres to within that cannula, and make as many cuts as you need to get the desired amount of cauterization of the grape, and leave it for three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you order that the medicine be repeated, repeat it, and remove the cauterization by scraping with the scalpel along the circumference of the grape, and modify it according to that amount of medicine that is in the circuit of the grape, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with an ointment for inflammation, and disinfect it with garlic if it is sore.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This remedy for healing is placed because it has been incised and lengthened for fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	This appears to be a medieval medical text describing the treatment of a condition called "uvuola" (which I assume is a typo for "uvulo" or "uvula"). The text describes several methods of treating this condition, including the use of cauterization, submersion in warm water, and application of various herbs and ointments. The treatment involves several steps, including cleansing the area, applying a cushion or support, and holding the patient's hand. The text also mentions the use of a "trauc" (which I assume is a typo for "traucom" or "traction") to hold an instrument in place. The final step involves applying a silver or gold object to the affected area.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	This line seems to be describing the application of steam or vapor to the affected area. The text suggests that the steam should be applied to the uvula (the small fleshy appendage that hangs down from the soft palate) until it becomes clear or unobstructed. This could be a method of loosening any mucus or debris that may be blocking the uvula and causing discomfort.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	This line appears to be describing the process of applying heat or steam to the affected area multiple times until it becomes dry. The text suggests that this treatment should not be applied immediately before eating, as it may cause discomfort or interfere with the patient's appetite. It also advises that the patient's condition should be monitored closely by a qualified medical professional, and that the results of any tests or examinations should be reported to the treating physician.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at your present time, take a cane and make a closure of the hollow with it, so that the mouth of the wound is covered, as the closure of the hollow prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This remedy is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extracting spines and of the gout that adheres to the groin and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Wounds that are visible adhere to the groin or to a toe-joint or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, it is necessary that you extract the gout that appears on the surface, as seen by the naked eye, and that you first place your tongue on the instrument, so that you can declare to the patient that this is in the groin.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if the wound is not visible and is hidden in the groin, then it is necessary that you make the patient vomit by inserting the instrument into the mouth, as the food that has been eaten is regurgitated into the stomach; or that you vomit the patient with a handful of oatmeal, or a spoonful of honey, or a bowl of seawater; or take a handful of wet sponge and apply it to the groin, and then move the groin to the location where the spines are extracted, and if you are forgotten there, do not forget.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	1. If possible, catch a snake and cut its tail, and then remove the meat carefully; or catch a pig and remove the meat and fat carefully.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If I do not forget the causes that have been said, then you will use an instrument in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	When there is a large knot that resembles a small one, and during the extraction of the same, the cavity is easily entered through the opening.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And if the head is elevated on your hand, and keep hold of that part of the head that is near the neck, so that it does not turn away from you, or that part of the spine or the vertebra, or that part which the doctor has placed his hand on.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient's thigh is too hard, because of its science of the location of the annexed cause and its repelling force, and pulls your hand away from the instrument as much as possible, according to the amount that is prepared inside when it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extracting annexed humors from the thigh.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When it is treated with blood that has been said in the division of the cure by doctors and does not comfort, consider if the thigh of the patient's leg is swollen, and that you have compressed the tongue of the instrument that you have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the sign of gout, extract that little or that subtle gesture nicely.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove that, then take a concave canula and enter it into the groin of the patient, and place a lit iron in the concavity of the canula, and make as many cuts (as long as the gout is dead and comes from the groin) and abstain from giving too much water to the patient.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And take a full mouth of water and work the patient's mouth in that way, and wash the mouth with that; and do not transplant any cause and give water to the patient an hour later, so that the gout is as it was before drinking the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If you do not forget that gout has been recommended, then sublime the groin with cinnamon or saffron using the instrument that has been recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, for four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another operation of the suffumigation, for you take a flame in which carbon is burned and the flame is covered with a covering on the top of which the instrument is placed at its extremity; and after the sublimation, pause the groin's mouth at the extremity of the canula, and close the mouth so that the sublimation is not forgotten before you know that the suffumigation is pervading the gout, for the gout to cry out as much as it did before the suffumigation.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If it does not work, you must repeat the subincision motions, and avoid touching the genitals, and eat salty foods and liquids, and do not urinate, and this diet is necessary if this regimen is to be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument that is used to cut the gallbladder when seen; and it seems like forceps sometimes, but there is no curve in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The part of the instrument that is in contact with the gallbladder and its end resembles the beak of a stork, which is sharp, in which lime is scraped off when any cause is touched, but it does not hurt.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this is the summary of the discourse in apocrypha and in section of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostel are special motions, of manual motions, according to which is remembered of them, from each one in this free book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in perforation and section of them by hand movements, of which one is for the specialty of apostel in itself put; and therefore that comprehends from the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en junctura carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	When it comes to the first source sentence, it seems to be discussing some type of medical procedure or treatment involving "apostemas" (which could be a misspelling or a term specific to this context). The sentence suggests that these apostemas are not perforated but rather have a "maturacio de la sania" (maturation of sin or impurity), which implies that they are being used in some way to treat or manage a condition related
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	The second source sentence seems to be discussing the use of "apostemas" in different scenarios and their impact on the body. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the time of the puncture of the appendix, and when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	If you know that the pain subsides and the fever ceases, and there is a decrease in the coma and pulse, and the acuity of the appendix head, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know that the puncture should be made at the location where the appendix is now and where pus comes from after the curing of the inflammation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should be made at the length of the flesh or heart, if the appendices are in the parts of more or less feet, and in the place of the tendons, nerves, and arteries; and, otherwise, in all places that do not reflect, and in those that do reflect, use the puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the appendix is in the flesh, you should more carefully puncture it when the digestion of the next part has been confirmed, as they have said; and if you puncture that denant, the course of the worm's tail and the sordid mothers will be prolonged, and less severe pain will be felt by the endurable labia and the depth of the.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer small punctures, and large ones in the large muscles and tendons, according to their size.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other parts of the leg where the joint is convoluted and fixed, when it is cut off that which is not necessary, it is done in the same way as that which happens in many doublings and swellings.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not cut through, there are three angles; and of those that are cut through, it is done in the same way as the figure of a thorn in a rose, as the knees of the ankles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are cut through, there are round and lunate sections, and they resemble those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	That which is not cut through is not like the surface muscles and tendons, but if you make a small puncture in that place, it is done in the same way as a superficial puncture.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the gout is large and has already collected a lot of pus, which perforates that part and does not let you touch it without drawing out all the dressing at that time; there is one part taken out, and the other side is left with a larger piece, and more are extracted, and they are treated with poultices according to the degree of inflammation that remains.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And if the patient is a loutish woman, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person, then the animal spirit's wisdom is resolved at the exit of the sickness, and more so the wound, and you operate on it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take this capital with great caution, and if you make a hole in the place where you perforate those gouts, be sure to cleanse the wounds and consider whether the plague of the gout is small or a flat slice; and if the gout is large, and the fissures of the hole are deep, then you should know that you must pause for a moment in every part that comes into contact with the ensembles.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the gallstone it cuts a part of the bowel or is concave, then you know that you complete it like a knife or a thread of string, as when you cut pans or razors, it is wet; and stretch that within the third day; and proceed with that and cure the one that comes out that is sane.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If during your operation you have an accident with blood, then you should administer water and see if there is a string in the one that comes out, and place that over the place where the flow of the visible wound is.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of the wound persists, then you know that you should administer a regular diet and cure and powder those that I have recommended in the recommended places of this free and divided body.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the winter season, and the place of the gallstone is located near the nerve, then you know that you should wrap powders in flax and oil, and place those over the places.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the places are raw, then you know that you should place powders wet with water and oil or flax and oil, and all of this should be inside the third day, as they have said, and you should remove the gallstone and cleanse that and administer a regular diet to the cure of that which comes out that is sane.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	When it comes to the cure of ulcers universally, secondly, the way of distinction has already been mentioned for every type of ulcer, which is the cure by specific means.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the sections of ulcers that come in the throat.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the throat of small ulcers, and those of specific types that contain tunics which are their substance; and the specifics of their motions.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And if they are pains, and those that contain moisture resembling honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain moisture resembling polls, and similar to them; and of those that are hard, firm.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those which are not to be feared, as the extraction of those does not harm the artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is what you should press with the instrument of the kind that is best suited, which is called an enteroscope, and enter if you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If you find that there is wetness, then cut the part as thinly as possible according to the length by cutting it superficially according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Begin the incision along line .B., then enter along line .G. When the wetness is eliminated, cut that part which contains the wetness, and do not leave any cause behind, as many as possible return, if Roman from that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	When submerging the catheter into Egyptian water (if present), and if not, into water and salt; and filling it with that plague and leaving it inside for another day, four times a week, this will cure all that is caused by that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	You should repeat over the Egyptian water catheter according to your doctor's instructions, and if you are confident that there is no cause of that film on it, you will cure the plague by inserting the catheter into the water when it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the rash has large knots, you should insert the catheter in this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	It is not in the form of a groove, and place the warts between the two lips of the groove and the end of that of all parts, and use your skill to extract the tunic that contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If you are not afraid of this, then you will find out at the first time.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And seemingly make the rash's section and treatment according to what you have said; and if the rash's section is thicker, then it has fewer sins and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	When some people have these types of headaches that cause pain in the head of certain men; the cause is that they have become stiff and hardened over an apostematic point on the head of a woman with a sore and swollen apostematic point, as hard as a deaf stone, rough, bluish, the which could not be made smooth, and if it causes pain in the head, it will cause pain in that place.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In the other headaches that occur in the head, this is not this type of headache, as the apostematic points on the heads of children are like the points of the ears, and the cutting of these all is only superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the cutting of those that are on the lower part of the body, because it is not possible to remove the cause of the sickness from the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And cure those that are appropriate for the treatment of that disease.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the cutting of scrophulas which happen in the chest.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	When the joints become swollen and painful, and the knees and ankles are affected, and some people experience pain in other parts of the body, it is important to seek medical attention immediately.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	When those have happened in the chest, and those motions that are generated between them, and all swelling from those is due to their own skin, and they appear as in the nodules and papules of the face, and as they have been reported.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The specifics of these scrofula are motions, four out of which are some stony, and the others that contain moisture, and the others that are malignant and do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	In that one you see good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color of water that is manifest is like the color of the skin, and is bad for all parts, and is not connected to the nerves of the chest, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not preonda, because you have not inserted a dry superficial part of the part from the part to the end of the line of .G. within the line of .B., and scorch that entire part, and extend two lips of the skin from onci, or from motz oncis if you need those, as they have been reported in the papules of the face, and extract a little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	When there is less caution that the vein or nerve is not pierced.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	If the swelling is not great, that it does not press on you, or that calms the leg, and that if it were to be pierced, it would not be necessary to pierce; if you insert the vein or artery and prohibit me from my operation, then stop using the glass vessel or other powders that remain in the sac, clean the vessel, and remove that which repairs the apothem and makes the plaster soft and begins to become porous.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the swelling is abscessed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation when the dressing is complete.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if you ask if there is any cause for the other small warts, then pierce those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the root of the large wart, then do not pierce that wart from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Avoid bending that too much and falling into it because of its own harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	When the wound of the gout is full of pus that you have already squeezed out and found in Egypt, and when you heal it,
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you adjust the lips of the wound and take out as much pus as possible without leaving any superfluous part.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you see that there is excess flesh on the neck due to the large size of the cervical mass, understand that you need to insert the tip of that, and then adjust the suture and this is what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if that of the cervical mass which contains humidity, perforate it with a superficial perforation here at the location of the maturation of the intestine, and stop the perforation so that it does not come out of the belly, as they have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And if you adjust the perforation, make sure it is clean and similar to those, so that it does not cause inflammation of the corpse.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that the plague has already been washed, then you cure that perforation with flesh generated inside when it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 33.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the needle of the aphrectomy, an accident happened to the guillotine.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	We cut that section in the epilhot and have not seen any man in our land who did that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of the Sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Many men have asymmetric feet, which makes the removal of the epiphysis difficult, as it is not beneficial for the entire body because all the veins and major arteries of the thigh are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Many are those who have screws in their mouth or ear or two ears, when the thigh is not in the canal, which causes a hurry to cut off the epiphysis to avoid loss of the same which is made completely.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want to cut off the epiphysis, either cut it into three equal parts of the epiphysis circles, or four small pieces by making a slight cut in the middle of the two circles, so that the cut is in cartilage, not in bone, and this place is suitable for cutting, where the flesh and the sinews of the leg are left.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then doctors should extend the gum graft to one centimeter, and after it comes into the canal, avoid the veins of the leg if they are not caused by anything.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then insert the knife as has been recommended; and it signifies over the cut of the canal for the flame which is of that eye which is of the gout and for the abscess of the tooth.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound be open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour comes in which the puncture is made, add a few drops of the plague's saliva to that, and let that alone sit on the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh heal faster when it is healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of the speech which has been recommended is not only to see that the feet have become thin, and the thighs are near death, and the breast is cut open, and they will insert the epigastrium there so that it breathes over the place of the plague for some respiration, and it will be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this I command the wound to be closed after it has consumed the malice of the plague; and it is the malice of it for three days; and therefore I command it thus, and cure that within which is healthy.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	When you have seen with your own eyes, as I have, that a certain part of the lung is divided by a cotel and meshed in the gallbladder, and you were called to the patient's care, and examined the abscess as it is swollen, and discovered the plague and purified the sac that was affected by the small plague.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore you have confessed that it had not been punctured by a vein or a wound, and the wind was of the plague, and purified that entrance where the fever had been healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it did not hurt the trade if it did not worsen in the vote, and after a few days returned to the lord's service of his possessions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I tell you that there is no fear in the section of the exfoliation.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section over the appendix that occurs in the gallbladder, and is called the hernia of the gallbladder.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This appendix, which is called the hernia of the gallbladder, is a large swelling after the color of the body, and is found in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	This is a medical treatise written in a language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The text discusses various medical procedures and their applications. Here's
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the natural course, there is no cure." This line suggests that some conditions are inherent or cannot be cured
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	In the accidental, there is another maniry (maniry is not a standard medical term, but it might refer to a medical tool or procedure). One resembles thin nodes, and the other resembles apothem (apothem is not a standard medical term, but it might refer to a medical condition or treatment). In that, there is fear." This line seems to describe two different conditions or treatments that are associated with fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not assume that this force is like iron in that which is small." This line suggests that the force or power being discussed is not comparable to iron, especially when dealing with small or delicate areas.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you propose that and investigate that one as he says, and if it resembles thin nodes and is not suspended in any vein, then you incise that part like the nodes, and extract that from there which counts for it from the skin and bursa; and if not, then you examine all the parts to be sure, and cure the place where it covers the cure as soon as it is healthy." This line seems to describe a medical procedure where a part of the body is incised and extracted, similar to the removal of nodes. The text suggests that the procedure should be done carefully and with certainty, and that the affected area should be cured as soon as it is healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	The text you provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish,
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	1. "De seccio de las specias de nodes" translates to "Of the sections of the species
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	2. "Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio" translates to "Of the nodes, there are different species and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	3. "E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio" translates to "And it is important to distinguish between nodes and exits, as there may be some doubt about this.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	4. "Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor" translates to "Therefore, you say that exitus is heat, fever, and severe pain that occurs when the superfluity is sedated by the boiling of the efflux; and the putrid matter that stops the fever also stops the pain and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	When there is no heat or fever, and there is no pain, and it counts that the lesion is located in the sac of the body, it is customary to call it a boil.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is second to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a pimple and is made as a cavity like a vase, which is either larger or smaller, and there are two species, one being fat and containing humor, and the colors of the humor are motes, according to what you have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And therefore, when you reach the treatment of the boil, you examine it and ask about its beginning at the place called the introme, according to what is found in the head that is nearest to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the man who examines and investigates all boils and other nodes, and that you take this introme and enter it into the place where there is moisture in the apostema, and you roll over the points with your fingers as you know that this introme has already penetrated the cavity.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then your last measure is the size of the apostema, and you extract the introme and consider that it is in the style of the one.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the dryness of the current is forgotten, regardless of what color it is, you must cut it superficially according to what I have said in the other postulates.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture in the track of the intestine, you should know that it is heavy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry over the cut with this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As they taught you, and suspend the intestine on that point, and clean the anus with ease, and keep the belt or bag over it, if possible, and take out that sac from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy one, and you should look for another way, and you must extract it at any cost, even if it does not come out without cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it comes out for a reason or another, few or many, the node returns according to the will.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that it comes out from any small part of the body, cut the swelling with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the swelling, and place it over the cushion of the post-operative care, and treat it with another curative remedy within which it is healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is a large amount, then you should cut the lips of the patient and treat that as gout that encrusts.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse is pulsating in the opposite direction, or non-pulsating, then cut and empty the location of the gallstone that is stuck and let it pass through two days or three if the diarrhea persists and the fever subsides; and then return to remove the gallstone that was stuck.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capital, Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of sterilization necessary in section and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the penetrations, and there are three kinds, which of those are the greatest, and of them are the smaller.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the greatest penetration is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the smaller penetration is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the smallest penetration is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are forms of iron, of gold, of the ends of branches that are gently cut, so as to not damage the intestines.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	This is the form of the experiences, and they are named after them, and one of those is called bridal.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	It has three species, four of which are large, more and fewer.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experience, the form of it is:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the lesser experience, the form of it is:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the fewer experience, the form of it is:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is therefore for those wounds, abscesses, fistulas, and swellings that enter those of the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And these points are large, like needles, and are placed in the same way as the greatest piercings, and are made of salt, or of iron, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of salt.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And these points are the black plums, which are placed in such a way that for them to be opened, the fistulas in the cavity of those which are reflexions, which are reflected in the levitation of those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	It has three species, four of which are the longest, and the others are middle-sized, according to the size of the fistula and the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	This line seems to be discussing the shape of a great wave's form. However, without more context, it's
Forma del experient migier de plom:	This line could be translated as "The shape of a larger wave's form." The term "experient" might be a
Forma del experient petit de plom:	This line seems to be discussing the shape of a smaller wave's form. A possible translation could be "The shape of a
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	This line is discussing the forms of gallstones, which are caused by certain types of waves. A possible translation could be: "The forms of gallstones are due to specific wave types, which can be simple or complex, and there are three main types: large, small, and medium-sized." The term "oncis" might be a misspelling of "onix," which is not a standard term in medicine.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	This line seems to be discussing the shapes of gallstones and their forms. A possible translation could be: "And they have three types of shapes and forms." The term "unc
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	This line is discussing the shapes of gallstones and their curvatures. A possible translation could be: "And they have three types of curvatures." The term "haventz" might be a misspelling of "have.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	This line seems to be discussing the curvatures of gallstones and their types. A possible translation could be: "And they have three types of curvatures, which are of three kinds." The term "e" is used here
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	This line seems to be discussing the necessity of gallstones in their location. A possible translation could be: "And all of these are
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that combines elements of Latin, Italian
Forma de unci simple migier:	1. "Forma de unci simple migier" translates to "Form of a simple
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	2. "Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:" can be translated as "Form of a simple part, form
Forma de unci orp gran:	3. "Forma de unci orp gran" translates to "Form of a large
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	4. "Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:" can be translated as "Form of a large part, form of
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	5. "Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:" translates to "Form of a small part, form of
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	6. "Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas" can be translated as "The form of the large has no two curves
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	7. "Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas" translates to "The form of the simple part has no two curves
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	8. "Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas" can be translated as "The form of the small part has no two curves
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	9. "Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas" translates to "The form of the large has three curves
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	10. "Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas" can be translated as "The form of the simple part has three curves
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	11. "Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas" translates to "The form of the small part has three curves
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	This are the forms of the scalpels that are cut and sharp at their edges and used to cut the nodes and the attachments, and they come in three species, four of which are large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of small-sized scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The cutting edges of those are sharp and the others are not, and they are not placed in that way, but because it is useful for the extraction of nodes to avoid injury to veins or nerves, and for the sake of healing the thigh and bringing peace to a small part through the cooling of that which cools by excoriation, the excision of the attachment.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of plasters, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small, just as you see them.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of large plaster:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of medium-sized plaster:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of small-sized plaster:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Their tastes are bitter and the appearance is like that of alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	When it comes to the external incision that was made in the hidden place and in that direction towards the parts of the fingers and thumbs, when you want to, do it as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spices, which are found between the parts that are not pierced by the needles and do not affect the maladies, and there are three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of venesections that are used for cutting the vein and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of it are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They were made from lemons, which were round in shape and had a certain length, and they were fine.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that you use these species of venesections for large, medium, and small ones, because for those cuts the flow of blood can be stopped quickly in case of need, and at first without medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	I do not recommend using those to cut the veins in all parts of the body, and do not use it only in the fleshy parts, as in the legs' changes and chests, and in the mammillas and belly and ears and nose, and it seems like the same as the fleshy parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	When certain points are made with other small-seeming instruments resembling needles, such as those mentioned above; which are then cut off when performed through liposuction, or you must insert a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	When certain points are made in the form of rounded ones:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol, Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Regarding the treatment of male breasts that are assembled from females.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some points are inflated on the breasts of male patients, and it is necessary to sleep while they start to grow hair, and the breasts are assembled with the breasts of women, and Roman ribbons are placed.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you follow this, cut along the line of the .B. to the line of the .G., and remove all the excess fat, and apply the dried medicinal ointment, and adjust the corners of the plague according to the shape of the chest, and cure that which is sick within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the breast refuses to yield to the parts on either side and is softened by its own magnitude, as in women, it is divided into two lobes, each of which is raised above the other, resembling the figure of the moon, from which each part contains the other, if that which is the major line contains the minor one of this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. And the abscess that is between two lips of the ulcer is extricated, the soreness is removed, and care is taken to follow what has been said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure, if it becomes sound.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not fulfill the inscription of what is written to calm the thighs and stop the flow of blood, and if the plague of the groin is submerged in the wet and corroded that comes from the gray, and cure that within which is sound.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capital LXVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	From the perforation of apostemas that come out from the thigh,
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	When those that contain moisture are present; and those that contain moisture are covered and are not cut in the lunar section according to this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And as all of it is evacuated, this is the complete outline of the incision and you lay it open the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound is already healed or is being treated appropriately for this, enter that it is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the incision of the nodes' spears and scrophulas is, and if the scrophulas, you cut over that part as has been said in the section about the scrophulas engagement.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is extended over that part which is scabrous, you administer this cauterization in it according to what has been said in this section.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of incisions of the abdomen that happen by artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery is torn and the coil is consolidated that is over it, then wounds appear on the abdomen. And those which are known to be inflammation and abscess are caused by the artery or vein: four when the abscess is by the artery is longer added in the chest of the heart; and when it is pressed by the abscess into the thighs, you feel in it that it is stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When that which is by vein is made clear in the manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	If the incision on this aphortema is wrong, and particularly in those that leave the thighs, ankles, and collar, and most other parts of the chest; and it is very large, so that the patient's cure may be avoided, and that which is in the extramits or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Regarding that which causes inflammation of the uterine artery, cut through the fascia in the long way; and then cut the artery on one side and leave the tunics open where it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place over that needle and make it penetrate into the other part, and stretch the artery at two places, — which causes you to have fever in extraction of several arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And prick the place which is between two limbs and let it be exposed where it is in you, and dissolve the aphortema.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer cure in which the poison is placed inside the limbs; and cure that which is convenient for it to be inside when it is healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the wound is caused by vein cutting, you should hold that with your hand as possible for the wound in the thigh, and insert the needle into the place where you have held it so far, and make it penetrate; and it should be in that double part that you extract from the other leg, and tie the wound with a thread as you have been told to do in the grape vine of the two parts of the thigh.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you will extract the thread, insert the needle into the place where you have inserted it so far, and stretch the ends of the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Clean the wound in the middle of the place where you have placed it so far, and if you see that it is not clean, insert the needle into the superfluous part of the thigh, and remove what is visible there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place your hand over the powder that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and administer the cure that is made of calamus and extractent from it when it becomes healthy.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	This sentence seems to be discussing a medical condition known as "aposteme," which is a type of nerve compression or entrapment. The phrase "torcio de nervis" translates to 
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	This sentence appears to be discussing the causes of aposteme in the arch and vein, as well as the nerves. The phrase "accideys en lor percussio" translates to "accidents caused by impact or pressure," and "trebal superfluable" seems to refer to unnecessary or excessive work or activity. The sentence suggests that aposteme can occur due to these factors in the arch and vein, as well as in the nerves themselves.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	This sentence seems to be discussing the treatment of aposteme in the areas around the helper or talus bone, or throughout the body where joint pain is present. The phrase "maugudas las juncturas" translates to "worsening of the joints," suggesting that the condition is causing inflammation or other issues with the joints. The sentence suggests that the treatment may involve addressing
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	This sentence appears to be discussing the severity of aposteme and its similarities to other medical conditions. The phrase "es apostema greu" translates to "it is severe aposteme," and "es assemblat a la color del autre cors" suggests that the condition may appear similar to other medical issues in the body. The sentence also mentions that aposteme can occur in the major joints and when there is increased vehemence or intensity, leading to a state of shock or stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	This sentence seems to be discussing the differences between aposteme and other medical conditions. The phrase "no es apostema agreguat" translates to "it is not additional aposteme," suggesting that the condition is not a separate or separate issue. The sentence also mentions that the problem is not in the chest of the body, and that the codena (which could be a reference to the spine or back) is deposed, and the condition affects all parts of the body without
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those who are in the joints, it does not cover that they are wrapped in iron, for if you do, it will cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	When someone has pain in the head or front of the face, it is called a migraine by doctors.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the wound is small, then cut the thread and pull out that part of the suture.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then cut the thread and pull out that part of the suture, and remove that; and adjust the plug to the suture, and care for that inside when it is healthy.
Capitol .li.	Capitol. This is a Latin word that means "capital
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	If the wound of the lip occurs on the abdomen, it is called an umbilical hematoma by doctors.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	And if you see wounds on the stomach of those and on other parts of their body, which are similar to those of the fungus, but the size is small and the cap is large; and if the lips of those are conversant, and are small and magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And if you have seen one and in the abdomen of that there were two that were less like fungus and there was no difference between those white ones with little size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	When the lips of those were reversed and turned inside out, and moisture ran throughout that entire time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	And you insert them into the foot and press it firmly with the other hand.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the insertion of them is that you consider it harmful if the thigh is wet, and the color of the skin is white, wet, of a subtle nature; you insert them with a moist spatula, and they are in your presence, and the cauterization is on the fire, four turns of the knife remove the secession of the sanc; and if you see the sanc, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the thigh is bruised and afraid, keep your hand away from the insertion; rather, do not take hold of recent points, and stretch that skin, the one they have spoken of; and rest it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And adjust in the constriction of the line of the wound; therefore, do not continue to stretch the large vein in the thigh, until it is cut and hangs by its own weight.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	When the belly is large, and there is any cause of fear or pain in it, it is most commonly due to the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you cut the belly, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And treat that part once it is healed from the plague.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And remember that you do not cut into anything that is black in color, of little sensation, and in the region of the leg, as that is where gangrene often occurs.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will remember this advice in the future.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. This is likely a reference to a specific law or regulation
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the eminent cure of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Eminence of the navel is caused by various motives; or by fissures of the umbilical cord which lies over the belly and yields to the intestine or bowel as in other ruptures; or by sac which flows from a vein or artery as it is said, or by stricture of the gut.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	When the pain is in the gallbladder and there is inflammation of the membrane, the color of the aposteme seems to be the color of the chest; and it is felt to be painful, and appears from various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is for the exit of the intestine, you place its position in that place where they have found it, with less violent diversity, and when you present that part to the eyes, and return it; and more you love it, and it becomes a great sign of the belly's opening and strong labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If by coldness, you are a lion and it is not hidden when you present your hand to yours, nor is it tightened, nor is it gripped.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for the sinus, you place these salves on these places that appear to have the aposteme in black declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If by flesh nothing, you are a heavy, large, and hard aposteme that sticks to one quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If by dryness, you touch the part of the lion with your hand.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider whether the umbilic is for sinus of artery, or vein, or dryness; you cover that you are not allowed in the cure of it, because there is fear and poor advice as you were taught in the capital where I mentioned the aposteme by artery and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	When the prominence of the navel is due to the belly or the cloth, you should command that the abdomen holds the desired position and remains extended; and then, with a gentle touch in the circuit of the navel, command that which was inside between your hands on the opposite side, and surround it with salt around the circuit of the navel at the location where you have placed your hands; and extend the width of the abdomen to the parts beyond that; and link it in the circuit with a firm grip or a loose one and the mane of the liar decent.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then extend the width of the abdomen over the horse and insert the desired one in that point and wants the intestine; and if you have not broken or held it with the horse, then you should extract it and push the intestine to the parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have broken the cloth, then hold that with your hand; and insert the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your arch or vein, then surround that point with your hand and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two firm places and insert two needles into the circuit around the abdomen at the location where you have placed the hands of the crotch, which threads pass; and tighten the abdomen on four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you want, remove the beads and clean the area where the flesh is exposed and falls on itself; or insert it when it is subtle and if it soaks up, and properly care for that part which covers the hernia inside where it is healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the eminence of the navel is flesh or due to moisture, you cover that the intestine has come out as we have said and damaged the sac or moisture, which damages it and properly cares for that part which covers and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De curacio de cranc.	Of treating a sprain.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As has been said, in the division, of the kind of sprain and in what manner it is treated by physicians, and that it is curable by iron in so far as it is not ulcerated; and it has been said that sprains are caused by too much or too little exercise and improper treatment of the disease.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 And they remove the old ones that some cramps are found in place where eradication is possible, as for cramp that is in the breasts or in the thigh and seems to be in the limbs allocated to withdraw all of it, and especially when beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When you have been studying medicine for a long time and are skilled, it is not certain that you can cure this patient or that I have ever seen anything like it, nor that it will be successful in your hands.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation is made when the patient is allocated as I have said, because you precede and lay out the thighs and purge black blood from some visible parts, and then note that if it becomes severely affected by replete manifestation.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the thigh in the preparation for the operation, and prohibit certain parts that may concern this; and consider all parts of the body as good for excretion, entering that no cause of the patient's diseases is found.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And lay out the sac, and do not remove that part, and expose the locations, and cleanse the sac entirely with your hand or with the instrument you can find among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have any objection to the sac being inscribed with vein or artery, then cauterize it within which the flow of the sac ceases, and cure it by another cure within which it is healthy.
Capitol .liv.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in
De curacio de ydropici.	The given text "De curacio de ydropici" translates to "On the c
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, of the spices of gout of water, and the details of each spice, for the cure of the patient by the physician.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	When that which is cured is made of iron, it is not merely the specific of althitas alone, and is not approximated to the specific of timpanists or of yposarcha, which is why it is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	E when you have medicated this specific of ydropici timpanistre with medicines and it does not comfort your medication, then consider, whether if the thigh has already been made smooth or another ydropici thigh, as if there is in it or in the belly some toxin or stomach ailment, and then you should guard that you do not use iron, because you fear this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see the thigh of virtue exuberant and it is not another thigh but ydropici so much, and neither child nor old, then the maneuver of the operation of the thigh is that you raise it between your most intimate parts, and the minister expresses the belly of the patient with his hand, and sprinkles the blood at the end of the penis, and then prepares spumous spinos in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	The first source sentence translates to: "It should be two sharp points of equal length, with a sharp tip; however, it should not be too short, so that in the operation, it does not enter the intestine, and does not cause harm.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	The second source sentence translates to: "And if you consider that the generation of hernias is from the intestines, then you should know that you cut through the umbilicus for three inches on each side, above the pubis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	The third source sentence translates to: "However, if the generation of hernias is due to obesity, your incision should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three inches.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	The fourth source sentence translates to: "And if the generation of the hernia is due to the mesentery, your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	The fifth source sentence translates to: "And you should not know that your incision is on the side of the abdomen that you want to cut to avoid tearing the superfluous tissue to that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	The sixth source sentence translates to: "And you should perforate the instrument through the entire codon, and enter it into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the codon and the siphac, and you excoriate that; and if the quantity of a ungla or enviro.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And if you have already drilled the gallbladder through which the pus came out to the desired location, and it is located in the belly.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a silver canula; it is made of silver or iron or lead, to which a small loop is attached, and on the sides three loops are attached: two of one part and one of another part; and it is the end of the needle as per the handwriting of a pen, as many times as possible.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the extraction of the purulent pus, an armillary sphere is used, which when the instrument reaches the abdomen, you must rotate it around the instrument, so that the pus is evacuated in the amount of time that if you do not evacuate within that time, then the patient may suffer from the loss of the spiritual soul, or it may happen to the five fingers that are nearest to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May you evacuate according to the amount of virtue of the patient and according to what signifies to you the dispositions of the belly of the virtue of the polls of the patient and of the goodness of the patient.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And withdraw the instrument, and remove the water that causes it as much as possible, which is held by the ring that is attached to the buttonhole of the one you are about to perform on, and it is recommended to you that you remove this second one.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it as often, and remove a small amount of water each time, and do this for a few days out of caution, and keep me informed if you do not see any water except a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear the patient, and remove a large amount of water, treat it as if it were buried in sand, moisten with soap, and leave it in the sun for a long time; and treat it as if it were dehydrated if it is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the mass is fitted as close as possible to the extraction of water, according to what I have informed you in water that precedes it.
Capitol .lv.	Capital Law.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who were born with the locations of the urinary tract not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	When some children complain of pain in the abdomen of their mother, and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or is straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then, a pointed cautery is not perforated (or is straight or not in its place) according to this form.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the throat a thin wire with a loop, and take it for three days or for fourteen days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when urination is difficult and painful; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the wire, it is possible that the urine that was over the place, did not see this loop.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Then, that of which the throat is straight, is treated with a wire of Plum, as has been said, for several days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Then, those in which the throat is not in its place, are sharp, which causes it to be due to those, that which is born and the head of the tail is due to the lack of a gap in the verge for not urinating in the parts of the belly, after raising the tail to the neck in the parts outside; and it is not of this generation, because so the sperm does not reach the mother secondarily rectified, and it is malnutritioned from that.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The first source sentence to translate is: "E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of the course of the sinew, four things may happen to you; and stop here at this point where you cut the sinew, and cure the wound that is inside when it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol, lv. (Capital, lv.)
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the white that may happen in the prepuce of the head of the penis, the glans, and the corona, and the adhesion of the prepuce of the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Wounds visible may happen to this white in the glans, and it is made of fleshy tissue.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of that one is malignant and another is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, cover that you suspend with a fine and cut that part within which the whole world is placed; and place your hand over the submerged cot in the Egyptian marsh; and that one, cure the wound that is inside when it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the white is malignant, of the color, you must cover that you administer cautery at the incision of the part and the root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the prepuce of the penis is not circumcised and one part of it is cut off and the other part remains, then you know that you have cut off the prepuce that was left at the beginning until it is consolidated; and when you treat that remaining part, remember that it is not certain that it will not be scarred.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if already there are signs of gallbladder and blackened prepuce and corrugatedness, then know that you have conquered all that has been denigrated and that is about to be corrupted or corrupted; and apply a layer of this over the affected area, which is contused by the flour of old millet and peas and beans.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And when you treat that, do so in another cure when it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is no discharge of blood, then you administer cauterization with moon-shaped points in this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Four cauterizations are made in two positions, one for the flow of blood and the other for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the tip of the tail is corroded and destroyed completely in an hour, you should know that you need to insert a catheter tube into the prepuce for the purpose of urination for that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the prepuce to the tip of the penis (and this attachment does not occur except in the one where the prepuce is, and over it there is no circumcission; and when it occurs attachment by phlegm or by abscess) you must exfoliate with a soft exfoliant after the foreskin has been dissolved and the tip of the penis has been completely separated.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to exfoliate those gently, you must exfoliate with a soft exfoliant on the tip of the penis and the foreskin, and thus the foreskin, when it is very fine, will be perforated by its fineness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the tip of the penis by a small amount of its fineness, which is already wet in the water to prevent them from sticking to another skin.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a cure that is dry within the wound when it has been consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capital.lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the formation of children and the treatment of that which occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for the continuity of the foreskin as with other plagues: but rather, when it is part of our operation and will be done on children, it is necessary to assign it to the best operation and let the surgeons learn from any mistakes that may be made.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	In the past, ancient people did not perform circumcision on all free men, as they did not use it in their laws, and this is because they have acquired through experimentation that the major part of artisans and barbers used to circumcise and cleanse, using true skin and true scarification.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already prohibited all these methods and did not improve better cleansing of artisans and barbers, using true skin and true scarification, where the foreskin is hidden, where the prepuce has two layers, and Roman tonic is applied later, and very little is done for another scarification and pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the cleansing that is done by alphitis, and is digital, of which they use the scapula, is not secured the scarrification of the end of the male member, where very little is inserted in the wound of the man.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation of amputation, it is very important to use a sharp knife and not to corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	When the child's codeine is short in nature, and there are no visible movements in that manner that do not require modification, and you have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Many of the modifications that are forced and limbs are cut short, which I have observed to be true, and that the sharpness is equal to the sharpness at the end, and therefore, when you present your hand with proportionate two sharp edges, and cut it according to a comparison in time, and the compression of the limbs is the figure containing the coden of the tail of all parts, which does not error for all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The manner of the first operation is that you make the child stand upright if it is of those that understand a little, which you do not do except when you lie the child on its belly so much only, and that he comes in another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And make that joy in all that maneuver that you can receive its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And make that be between your most statues ready, and not be any fear; and hide the cuts in your hand or behind the child's thigh, so that the child does not see those or use other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And you should insert your hand between the patient's thighs and breathe into their abdomen, and remove any foreign body that may be inserted into the umbilicus, and modify that which is added to it due to impotence.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And you should tie the knot at the marked location, and place a string on the other side of that, and pull it up to the point where it is well retained, and insert it between two cords.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should lift the abdomen upwards and hold the umbilicus; and gently push the small end of the cord in, and then sprinkle powder over it and on top of the powder, sprinkling olive oil mixed with rose water; and place that over the other opening; and care for that as part of the curative process.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is the form of the modifications made to the forfexes:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some are extramitters that are not talismanic, and the others are talismanic, so that it is not broken the clasp, and it is the length of the acute angles as the length of two manubria engulfed.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	When there is an error in the world, it is often because we avoid the intrinsic code entirely, or part of it, and do not inscribe it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is important that you extend that part of your body to the right side during the examination of the location and that those equal parts are inserted at the second position.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your hand, then extract that part with your elbow and insert it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days and the abscess is still not discharged from the incision, then you should enter as soon as possible to remove that abscess with ease, and insert the second part that is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep the head of the abscess in check, so that it will not be affected by this action.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And cure that part of you which is infected with the powder, using the powders that have been recommended in the treatment of the powder.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is inserted over the measure and follows the parts as directed, you will not notice it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And cure that part of you which has been told to be cured when it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol 88.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	When there is retention of urine in the bladder, it is caused by inflammation or congestion due to pears or scars, or swelling and carnification, and it seems similar to what has been said about the hands of those who undergo surgery in division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see a retention of it, which is due to pears that are already in the neck of the bladder, then you should cover the thigh with a cloth over the openings.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that person over the thigh and extend the abdomen from the part where it meets the thigh to the other side, and tighten the abdomen as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then you should press on the bladder neck to expel the pears from the behind parts, so that the urine is completely dissolved.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If the inflammation is not dissolved and it is very severe on the thigh, then you should cover the abdomen with a cloth over the opening. Then administer an extraction from the bladder using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It is made of silver and is subtle like a leopard's claw, as it is similar to the sharp edge of a pen in the hand, which is subtle at the end, like a cane made of silk on the cap of the hand.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	When the woman is urinating, take the folded hand and place it on the outer part of the hair or beard for good grooming; and enter the extramitation of the hand into the area beyond the ring, and insert it as needed into the forfexes if there is any cause for the hair, less introduce it in the canula with vehemence and then close the ring and the album of the hole.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the woman's leg on the pillow, and cleanse the wound with the water of the urine and the washcloth, and with oil of olive and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And enter the ring as easily as possible into the opening of the hair; and double the hair at the part of the belly; and press the ring gently there; and press it in as it approaches the vagina, and it should be entered so that the woman does not suffer any harm, and do not force it if it does not fit well.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And extend the hand under the hair little by little until the urine soaks the hair.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	When it is necessary to remove that and treat urinary troubles, use a catheter, do not stop until the bladder is emptied and the uterus is relieved of pain.
Capitol .lix.	Capitol .lix. translates to "Chapter 18
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of catheterization of the bladder and the similarity of instruments that are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or aphthous erosion in the bladder or the surrounding area, or there is a coartate perforation, and you want to draw water and medicines from that, then use an instrument called a clamp cedar, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	However, in the removal of the bladder, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three ways: two from one side, and how many times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, there is a cavity where the urine is collected, and the second quantity that oppresses it is added, and when any cause is removed from that drawn-out urine, it is expelled, and when it is expelled, it is expelled, and when it is expelled long, the clamp cedar is used, which is phosphated in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When you want to prevent moisture in the vagina, insert the end of the clitoris into the moisture, and apply it as much as possible to those parts that are affected by the moisture, so that the moisture is applied to the cavity of the clitoris.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And insert the end of the clitoris into the urethra according to what has been recommended in the cringing; and apply as much moisture as possible to that moisture, so that that moisture penetrates deeply into the vagina, and the thigh is centered on that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the cringing by which the vagina is cringed, and that form is:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	If it is made of silver or gold, of the cap which may be similar to a small pen, and then the canal liquefies.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And hold the vagina tight, and pause in that moisture which you want to cring in the vagina, and apply it between two with great force, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And he pierces the extremity of the thigh into the groin.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And he stretches the opening of the thigh over the groin with wetness, as it has already been permeated by that humidity in the cavity that is located at the bottom of the thigh.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you do not have a vagina, then take a gauze and make a circle of that size; and perforate it completely through that opening; and enter it firmly into those tunnels, as it is revolved; and add the circle as it is added alsofatur, so that you can pause in that amount of humidity that you want, and oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that in the instrument and make it as it was made in the groin, and express it as you expressed in the opening of the thigh, and when the humidity penetrates into the groin, you can remove it.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Regarding the extraction of gallstones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the specialities of gallstones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between gallstones formed in the uterus and gallstones formed in the groin, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The first source sentence to translate is: "E havem dit la peyra en
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The translation of the sentence "E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica" is: "And the peyra, when generated in the true vesica, is that which is found in the
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	The translation of the sentence "E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio" is: "And you say that this is an open and abbreviated description.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	The translation of the sentence "Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels" is: "Therefore, say that the peyra generated in the true vesica directly affects the children; and from the sacks of it, the urine that is drawn from the vesica appears to be water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the uterus raises its voice, and moves its eyes, and is dressed; and thereby, the anus is opened in the motion of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	When it comes to the care of children who have reached fourteen years of age, and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is easier to tolerate that which is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of the one from which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is less, it is opposed to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to reach the cure of that one, begin at the beginning with the examination of the thighs of Christians, from which the whole fenestra is extracted; then that fenestra has some veins prohibited for the prevention of the stone, and you must have the inquisition of Lu.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And if it is near the thighs of the patient's feet and is compact and moistened with such that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder, or jumps from one place to another or some veins.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And make that cezer between your hands as prepared as possible, and the rest of you are placed further with your feet, so that the whole uterus is made to decline towards the parts behind.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And properly prepare that and the entire wound.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the gallstone in the space, then carefully cut it as thinly as possible over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you don't cut off the entire foot, then cover that with oil and the left-hand sign of the left hand, if it is a child, or the right-hand sign if it is an adult, and enter that into the right-hand side of the belly.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And make sure the gallstone enters the foot as much as possible.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually enter that small part into the vaginal opening.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And press over that with your hand, and expel that from the parts of the wound you cut, to the location where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And order the minister to press on the vagina with their hand; and order another minister to extend the fingers on the parts where you cut, and to hold the thread that is left over from the location where you made the incision.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And enter that sponge with the incidence of that, which is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	When the pain is in the thigh, not in the groin, but rather on the left side of the thigh; and the incision should be made over the protruding bone and the one mentioned is in the thigh, and the transverse incision is also made, so that the incision is wide and follows the quantity that I want to remove from the bone, and not too much, for if you don't understand the one mentioned in the thigh, the bone must be cut with the incision, and it is forgotten about its deficiency.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You know that some part of the bone is curved and has sharp angles, which makes the compression difficult for this reason.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that part it resembles a gland, and is round, and the easier compression is made for it.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that part with the curved and sharp angles, adjust in the incision.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forgotten to cut or to hold the bone with gentle force, the end of which is like a finger that you hold on the bone, and do not let it slip from your hand; or if you insert the subtle instrument with a curved end later.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot find it on that, increase the size of the hole a little, and if you see any blood, cut away the part that has been bitten by acid.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is smaller than a pea, then at the beginning you push it into the mouth of the bladder and place it inside; and then push a small piece in; and seemingly make sure that if it is less than ten.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is very large, then you ignorantly push it into the bladder, and a part of it may remain outside the thigh: whether it is dead or alive, due to the continuous distillation of urine, for that reason the place is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If the expulsion of the stone is not complete, or if it gets stuck in the fracture of the bladder, then use forceps to extract it from inside.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe leaves and garden earth, and compress it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place olive oil or rose oil and vinegar on that bandage, or olive oil rosy and water, so that it may be sutured.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	When you have put the patient on their side, do not let the limb slide into the corner.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	If that happens again, wash the area with warm water and oil, and apply it again today and tomorrow to make it heal.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If pustules appear on the face during the plague, they will become inflamed and red, and it seems that the sanc is in the vagina frozen, and for this the hurina prohibited (and it is known by the excretion of the sanc from urine) must be inserted into the aforementioned plague and the sanc extracted, which if it does not cause the vagina to become carbuncled and putrid, it will.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And wash the plague with water that is agreeable to you, warm and salty, and opposite to all species, and such as is appropriate for your cure when it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover the plague in all the hours of your cure, when you lie down and adjust the medicines that are placed on the spot.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and is in the bladder, and it sticks there, and the urine is prohibited, then you should treat this as I advise you to do when you come to the operation, for too many cases of this treatment have been accused of cutting; and if you have already done so, and you are holding a drill bit of iron in your hand, the form of which is like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Then place it at the edge of the triangle, sharpened, and stick it into the flesh.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	When you take hold of it and tie it firmly with that thread, make sure it does not return to the vagina.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	When you insert the iron into the uterus, it will be easier to pass through that perforator because the perforator will come forward with the uterus.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then you rotate the perforator in your hand and gradually push it into the uterus until it passes through the opening of that part to penetrate the other part; then the urine will be completely discharged.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand over that place where the uterus is located on the side of the vagina, where it is swollen, and the urine is expelled, and the womb becomes healthy.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure does not work for you due to any reason that prohibits it from being used, tie a knot outside the vagina, and tie another knot inside the vagina.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then close the opening of the vagina with those two strings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	When cutting and modifying the sinew with care, it is made in the plague.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to cut the sinew of the heel, but rather because it does not return to the cavity, and the other sinew also, when it is slid along the edge of the heel, the coda returns to its place and draws the plague.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary for you when you have the sinew slid, that you raise the coda to the parts desired, or that you return the second complement, and draw the plague away with it, as has been said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitulum LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Chapter 117. Of extracting the stone from the female genitalia.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in the female genitalia that is not produced.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see stone in any of those, the cure is difficult for the patient, and it is forbidden by rough hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman fears to see it.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is scientific enough to dissect if she has been castrated when young, or if she is one of the women who have been mutilated.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third line of the text is: "E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision on the heel in women is longer than the location of the heel, so it requires a deep incision, and in that case there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If you need to provoke pain in your own hand, then you should hold a woman's leg as tightly as possible, and it will not be harmful.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are private about that, then hold the woman's leg as close and subtle as possible, or present a mature woman with her feet in the position of the feet, or a woman who is parting from this art in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make the presentation, and command the one who does everything you order, from the examination of the heel to the beginning; which causes him to look if the woman is visible, hold that you say in the ass of the one and want the heel.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If it causes fear, then take that away from there and command the one who says that you should insert on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not visible, then command the mature woman to enter what you say in the vagina and examine the heel, and hold her right hand on the vagina and appreciate that well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If it becomes too painful, then cover that part with a warm cloth to alleviate the pain from the orifice of the vesica to the parts near the anus until it subsides and does not return to the anus.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And if you have inserted it into that apposition of the joint of the thigh of which part is at the parada and cent the pea in that part, and he says that it is not worn out by the pea yet, then it is not necessary to replace it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section is not large at the beginning; and then insert the ray over that section, and if you feel the pea, adjust the section according to the amount that you know that the pea is getting out of that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And do you know that the species of pea are motas? Four of those are few and large, lean and hard, long and round, and have no ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many species there are of the pea that you signify over it that you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see that the stone is coming out, adjust in the place where the glass was cut and take it by hand for an hour until the stone is completely out, and then return to your operation when the pea is outside.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare for the tools that you need to say in the extraction of the pea in men, so that you can help those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you wish to evacuate the child, and you know that the expulsion of the child is from the uterine canal, then place powder on the spot and stretch that am pulvils and stricture descent, and do not retrace this; and leave the stone and do not extract that, for fear the woman dies.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And carefully treat the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the acuity of the child's pain is reduced, and the place is wetted, then return to your operation when the stone is outside.
Capitol lxii.	Capitol LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of sectioning an inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is not simply an addition of moisture in the white gut which we leave the coden of the generatives containing the flesh, and it becomes a cipher.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veins are in the proper panniculus which is prepared by nature in the part of the flesh, when it is cuyat that another flesh; and it is the coden of the generatives between the white gut which we have said, and it is not known unless tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia occurs due to the destruction of that matter, which is caused to be enclosed in this material, and some times occur due to the impact of points on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This humor has various colors, whether the color is red or turns into citrine or blood, or black excrement, or white slimy, and it becomes less.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The remedies by which this addition of water is washed away are those for which it is said: if it is in the white circle that has been mentioned, then the point is reduced to a small amount as a figure of a hoop, and appears on the genitals, where the humor counts that of all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humor is in the proper panniculus, then the point is reduced to a part of the hoop and for another hoop it is estimated that there is another hoop.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humor is between the foreskin and the white circle, then you should remove the feeling.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humor, you spread the color of the humor on the point in the entrance of which the form is preceded; and then, according to that, what is seen in the appearance of the entrance, judge from that what it contains.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we arrive at the patient's bedside, you should cover the area with commands that are suitable for the foot, and sometimes the part of the body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if you lie down on your back over any cause, and then pause the movement of the clothes.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And if you lie down on the left side of the patient, and command the attendant to follow the right side of the patient, which extends his arm from the hip to the two sides of the chest and the edge of the navel of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And if you take some oil and cut the chest muscles of the patient's lower abdomen, according to the length of the petenilh.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And if the cut is correct, it should be at a distance from the line of the hip muscles, and then enter the white part of the chest, which is understood.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And clean it, and observe, and keep it for yourself so that you do not use it; and your excision is the one that you extract by partida jassia that is suspended in the hand of the patient and gently scrutinize the excision according to the amount you can.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And make a small hole in the anus for perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And separate the labia of the clitoris from the surrounding tissue, and extend the cipher to the parts below; and do not touch the vagina with your fingers, and insert the cipher in the hand that is as possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert it entirely or in the vagina, and more particularly under the skin, as if you do not scrutinize perfectly the insertion of the cipher, it is not guaranteed that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the husband proceeds with the operation of his penis at the time of your operation, when you have completed the cipher section, return it to its place, and adjust the labia of the clitoris with the sutura, and care for that as the others, if it is healthy.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the husband is corrupted by another disease, know that you lie about those which are said to suspend him, and extract the penis, and care for it as they have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if you see that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to remove the sand, and enter into the submerged layers of wool with oil or rose oil; and then another layer of wool that you have submerged in oil and rose oil, and expand it over two gathers and the navel of the belly; and then unfold the pleats doubled and powders, and tie them around the one that is next to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And if you want to tie the pressures of two gathers and their woolen folds according to this example; and their points are at the ends where they are pressed with a cotton or damp cloth, and they are added to the structure in the belt of the gathers, and the first one takes the tip of the buttocks inside the two, and the second one takes the end of the pantile, and two extractions over two cushions and two extractions on other ankles, and all the narrowing is adjusted in the belt of the gathers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In this source sentence, the text is discussing the treatment of a hernia using a form of cauterization, specifically with a subtle cauterizing instrument called a "cutellar". The text suggests that this method should be used on the tissue surrounding the hernia, specifically on the "ginitius" (which may refer to the fascia or other connective tissue). The text also mentions that this method should be used after the hernia has been descubert (discovered or opened), and that the cauterizing instrument should be applied in a specific manner, as described by the doctors.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	The first line of the text translates to "When it is necessary to use a letter in Greek." This could
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then make a hole in that cipher, and it will ignite when all the moisture is outside." This could be interpreted as a description of a process or tool used to create a mark or symbol using Greek letters or other characters. The phrase "ignite" might suggest that the process involves some form of heat or fl
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the cipher arm out, and scrape it out, and scrape out the cautery underneath; and inscribe the second one within you as much as possible when you have eradicated all of it; and keep this from the fire that it does not touch." This line seems to describe a process of carving or inscribing a symbol or mark onto a surface, possibly using a cautery tool. The phrase "eradiques tot lu" could mean "eradicating all of it," suggesting that the entire symbol or mark is being created. The final line advises caution to prevent the fire from damaging the inscribed mark.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is safer and longer lasting than cutting." This line suggests that the described process of carving or inscribing a symbol or mark is preferable to cutting, as it is safer and has a longer-lasting effect. The use of Greek letters or other characters in the operation may contribute to its perceived safety and longev
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you have any disagreement with cutting or cauterizing at the time of operation or during cauterization, or with using suture, then you should know that this is not recommended for you. Instead, follow the advice given to you." This line advises the reader to follow the recommended procedure for the operation, regardless of any disagreements they may have with cutting, cauterization, or using sutures. The use of Greek letters or other characters in the operation may contribute to its perceived safety and longevity.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	When the patient's thigh is painful and does not hope for the second operation due to its horror, then administer the second dose as you recommend; and when you are certain that you understand, that this hernia is painful.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	It is necessary that you place the patient's thigh on an elevated bench, then make a hole in the flesh at the lowest part of the swelling, and stop the drilling after the length of the bone.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if the hole is wide enough to let out all the pain.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area and hold it there, so that you can let out the painful part.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And take care of that until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	When the pain is opposite to the eclipse of the hernia at that time, then do not do it except for this: and that is because the white gauze in the wound causes contraction and prohibits the inflammation of the hernia, so you must place in the wound a needle or instrument of the kind from which the hernia is extracted from the hernia, in the form that precedes; or adjust in the compression of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	You are aware that the urine returns, and it is excreted in approximately six to eight months; and when it is added, you should be perforated according to that menstrual cycle, as the uterus will pass through those days.
Capitol .lxiii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you've provided is not in
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	This line seems to be discussing a section on treating a hernia and its cure. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation. Here's a possible
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	This line suggests that there is fear of danger in the section about this hernia affecting larger parts of the body; however, it was observed that the patient has been discharged and is expected to be saved for the better. This could mean that the hernia was not severe enough to cause significant harm.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	This line seems to be asking if you remember the operation in that case and the specifics of the surgery. Without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation. However, it appears to be discussing a specific surgical procedure related to the
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	This line seems to be discussing the cause of the hernia, which is said to arise from the bodies of those in whom the genes are combined and is caused by various causes: either acute superfluity, which is disposed of in the genes, or by percussion. This could refer to a surgical procedure where the excess tissue is removed from the affected area.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	This line seems to be discussing the color of the hernia, which is determined by the color of the skin, and does not become atrophied in the pain, and is a severe hernia. This could refer to a hernia that is larger and more serious than others.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When a post-operative swelling is large, of a dark color, and does not respond to treatment, it is called an abscess.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some wounds are caused by the penetration of arrows, and by inflammation of the tissues already perceived as a result of the injury, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It is believed that inflammation of the wounds is caused by the spreading of the swelling when you touch that part with your hand; and it does not matter if it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	It is believed that inflammation of the veins is not caused by any cause, but rather by the compression of the hand when you touch that part.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is possible that this special wound is a cut and on the other parts; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and extend the blood to the parts thereof, and extract that from the white part, and separate the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and inscribe the suspensory push that you extract from this total part of the parts of the wound.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the flesh has already become solid in those hardened parts, then you should carefully remove the flesh and leave it exposed.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between any cause of the phlegm, or between that which is between the abdominal walls, then you should carefully remove all of that adhesion and leave it exposed with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the tissue is naturally present at the location of the adhesion that is behind, then you should carefully remove all of that tissue and leave it exposed as has been said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with a mixture of lint and olive oil and red wine; and apply this to the other cure as it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the surgery for hernia that is of a vent.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is a post-operative swelling that occurs due to an envelope-like structure similar to the mollification of the testicles, and it is difficult to move and walk on the thigh.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	When treating this disease, there is fear of the cold that precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we should mention operation in the second part of the first sentence.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that the disease is best treated on an elevated table; and raise the suspensory of the testicles to the parts left; and tie the codon of the genitals at the baysels that are shown to the vergua; and hold onto those other ministers that you, and extend them vehemently.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And insert it with cold humor through the perforation on the right side of the vasectomy when the vessels are discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And extract from all parts as much as you have said in the extraction of the uterus, which are in the templates.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And fix an agulha in which there is a double fibula, and link it to the first of the locs in which the vital parts are found, and link it to the other watched at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And insert them in the middle location through a second perforation after the long one of the body, and extract that which is added with the fetulent and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	When treating the plague, take care of the other plagues in which you want to be conceived by those who cause the waters that do not rise from two genes, for it is not harmful for this reason.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If you happen to lose all your hair, it is believed that the testicles are dried out or that the testicles, due to this condition, are not nourished by the vessels, and they are dried up, or that they are fixed in such a way that they do not function properly.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	The Cure for Intestinal Hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the front of the abdominal wall, causing the intestines to be pushed through the opening made in the abdominal wall.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdominal wall or of the intestines, and they are affected by these specific causes: blows, squeezes, clamoring, elevating any heavy cause, or resemblances.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the symptom of this, when it occurs due to the extension of the abdominal wall, is that it happens little by little over a long period of time and does not stop, and the patient suffers from coughing up blood into the throat because the abdominal wall compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the symptom of gout appears in the toe, at first it causes severe pain; and from then on, different parts of the foot appear to swell, and this is due to inflammation of the intestine, and the cause of this is that the intestine is damaged in the areas affected by gout.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some parts of the intestine are forgotten by the foot, and this hernia is called entestinal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some parts of the intestine are caused by inflammation, and some parts of the foot are found in the toe area, and here they are held back, and there is great pain and discomfort in the thighs, and some parts cause severe pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the symptoms of this disease, iron is feared because it may be escaped by the caustic in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the tool for the operation of this is that you command the patient to lie down on the table with the foot in the cavity of the intestine if it obeys the return of the sieu, and place your hand over the sieu col between the patient's legs, and raise the changes of the intestine.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	When you approach the abdomen, which contains the abdominal muscles, and insert the needle into the abdominal muscles at the desired point, and then fix it in place with lips of the incision next to the second one that indicates to fill the incision with something suitable for it.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If the incision is smaller than what you can comfortably handle, then the wound may be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then remove those cords that are placed on the abdominal muscles, entering if the white, hard cord of any part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then enter the needle into the hole that is in the testicle, in the hole that is in the white cord, which is placed on the abdominal muscles, and then into the second white cord, and release the adherence that is in the back of the wound.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if you see that the abdominal muscles are cut, and then extend the white cord to the left side, and lift the wound up to the incision; and command the minister to extend the wound and you dissolve the adherence that is behind in the completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When you ask if the patient's abdomen is not covered by the white, hard hip bone, it means that there is no cause for concern regarding the abdomen being covered by the hip bone. This statement is simply stating that there is no issue with the abdomen being covered by the hip bone.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you suspect something else, then place your hand on that part of the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	When you have prepared a needle with a suitable large hole for the gall, and inserted it into the fecal matter, which is located at the base of the scrotum, which separates; and when you insert the extremities that emerge from the gall into the hole that has four holes, and place them on any figure in the crotch; and then attach that to the scrotum that has been said to be the codon of the testicles, with great importance to two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And envelop the extremities of the gall and attach them to the figure in the crotch, which is said to be the codon of the testicles, with great importance to two parts. Do not allow any other cause for this, as it may lead to cautery after this.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another similar loop after the first one, for three minutes; and these two loops should be placed on the scrotum that has been said to be the codon of the testicles, according to the size of the dit, and insert all the remaining ones in the same roundness, and take it away from the huou.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then you should cut into the part of the scrotum that is further away from the testicles, as it has been recommended in the past that they have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool that has been dipped in oil and rest on the plague; and apply the ligament that has been recommended (and some white veins have been cauterized, which have said about the incision of the gall bladder, where four veins have fallen) and stretch the ligament inside so that it does not come out.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the pain of the gallbladder is delayed, then apply cold water to the tail, and rest on it inside so that it does not come out as has been said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the plague with another cure for the plagues inside which is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of venturesome hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia it has not been seen that it was strained during the cure of the patient with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing that was said to be done as it has been recommended in the hernia that is made; which is to cut as it has been told on the section over the ease of the patient; and to dry in the middle of the area in the environment of the apothecary that I have given, inside which the vessels come out, if they fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	When the plague has been cured according to what they have said that it is cured,
Capitol .lxvii.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	I apologize, but the text you provided is incomplete and does not contain the phrase "Capitol .lxvii." Please provide the complete sentence or context so I can assist
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	This line appears to be a continuation of the previous one, discussing the cause and effects of a condition in the ankles. However, without the complete context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation. Here's a possible translation based on the given line:
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	When you do not give the children any cause for their bellyache; and if you do, it is very little; and return them to their cradles in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged as much, a slit is made in the abdomen where the gout enters that causes the bellyache; and it happens that the abdomen extends too far, which is caused by the extension of the abdomen, and it becomes soft and the place where it is inserted swells and comes out.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for it is a cautery that is preceded by the narrative of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some wounds are cured by iron following this method: and it is that the patient lies on his side with his feet towards you, and the place of the emergence of the intestines is cleaned and cut by the heat of three degrees.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white belly that is below the navel where it is discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And hold the ray and place it over the place of the emergence of the abdomen, and press that on the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then, approximately center the prominent hip bones over the end of the leg's thigh bone, and adjust one of them to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then, remove the end of the bone, and do not cut the thigh bone in total, nor extend the hernia, nor any other cause as you will know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then, cure that as in the treatment of diseases, and when you cut the wounds, cleanse and restore the hernia within what is solidified; for the thigh bone is contracted and not adjusted to the prominent break.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, where it is pushed for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 88.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the testicles' cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Observed motions of the testicle cord in healthy men are softened by heat, as the flesh that is within that area is softened, and the appearance of the gaze is improved.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary to apply that which is prescribed in the treatment of the thigh that causes pain after exercise, and cut the entire cord that is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust the lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, in the beginning, the excess of the softened codon is three cuts or four and is fastened with a suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And insert between the sutures; and properly care for the other diseases that are inside when it is healthy and clean the wounds.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of dismemberment.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that dismemberment is excommunicated in our law for the reason that I remember it in this free book; and it is not necessary to remind it except by a few tools, of which one is the one that I have in my science of surgery when I am buried in it, knowing the treatment of the animal to which it belongs; and the other tool is that we should have need of dismemberment of other animals for our purposes, as for motors, and mouths, and pigs, and pork, and like animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And then say that dismemberment is done in two ways: either by cutting, or by making a slit in the cut.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In that which is called a strain, the way of the operation is to make us carve out the beast in its tail, coming inside those parts of the body that are softened and bound and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And hold those by your hand inside where they are loose and not seen from the outside touching.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In that which is called castration, it is necessary to have the beast and press on the sac of the testicles of the other side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And tie those, and insert over each part where two parts are processed by cutting.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And insert those plugs that will have to be extracted.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not put anything over those of the phallus except the subtle one that is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better than the one that is made by straining, for in straining there is often a cause of the testicles due to the beast wanting to fight.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague inside where it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	The text you provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish,
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	I apologize for the confusion earlier. The text you provided is in Latin and it is a medical treatise about her
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	The text you provided is in Latin and it is a medical treatise about hermafrodozia in men. It states that the second sign of hermafrodozia is when water appears in the space between the testicles, and within that space, there are four female genitals.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When some people have pain in the urinary tract that is located in the testicles' chain.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is a special case: it is that the woman's humor is located over the pecten, as if two testicles were present in a man, a few centimeters apart, at the end of the penis, as the perineum of a man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure is of three kinds: from two men and one kind of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It seems that you have inserted those adjusted parts within which the decay of that is expelled, and that you cure those other diseases with the same cure.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, where urine is located that is in the chain of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lengthening and embellishing due to the causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lengthening is much admired when it is natural and is made more legible with the regard; and some parts are magnified in some women to such an extent that they spread as in men and pass through the act of intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	When you have enough flesh on your arm or on the other, insert them into the incisions.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not end too early in the incision, rather in the first layer of skin, so that it does not leak serum.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And keep caring for that part until it is cured after being healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The most difficult scar is the one that is inside the thigh, and it is often very painful to touch, and it heals slowly like the first wounds of childbirth (and for this reason it was called "childbirth scar"); therefore, when you cut, insert your finger as you insert the flesh, and care for that part until it is cured.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of curing gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the man does not have a hole, or if it is too small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to the disease that preceded it, and it is made or by unsuitable skin or by a small and thin gash.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made or in the prepuce of the penis, or in the folds of the scrotum, or in the bag below the penis, or in the bag above the penis, and forbid sexual intercourse and masturbation, and most of all, forbid ejaculation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	If the pain is caused by watching the moon, if the menstruation is apparent, then; otherwise, you should close that with your hand, either with your fingers or with your thumb.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	Otherwise, if the menstruation is due to a slight secretion in the labia, then you should close that with your hand, and then loosen it.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And if you place your hand over the labia silks, and then pause the fingers on the indicators of the most common parts,
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on the bed, the thighs spread out, and then extend the labia as far as that slight secretion is broken and the menstruation is flowing.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And hold the wool and apply oil to it, and then place that over that location, and wait for the day when that location is not solidified.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	When the cipher is large and dense, you should cover that area with either salt or mirth.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the operation is by flesh, then suspend that area under the hand, and insert it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if they have medicines that stop the flow of their painful bites, use as much as possible, and dried ginger, and stitching, and needles, adjust the album of your hand.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And provide a wide-mouthed bucket for the purpose that the plague is not solidified.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it by the handle and administer cool water to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And when she is cured, apply that other cure for consolidation as soon as she is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	If some things happen in the other animals of other species, then cover that area with this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is for cranial aphasia, then in the cranial area that is not affected by contrariness, use iron in this method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capital. Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	When it comes to the treatment of hemorrhoids and red blood that occurs in the female genital area.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated of the openings of veins that are continuously in motion and are often found in women. And they are called hemorrhoids because they are throbbing.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the specifics of those and their seasons, and direct which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and throbbing occur when the hormonal changes occur and do not appear in symptoms, and there is no need for treatment in those cases.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Most of those that are on the opening of the female genital area where the pain is felt, are those that have been treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And do you cover the woman with warm water and extend the legs at the feet or over the shoulder, and insert those in the holes.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And you should powder over those the fluids of the womb from one of the powders that are inserted, and it is similar to the way it is on those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	When pressing the affected feet for about an hour, and then rinsing them with cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of the wound persists, then apply this ointment made from summer, honey, and coriander seeds, and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oregano and honey and mix it with water, and make a plaster with it on the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the wound separates, then so be it; and if not, apply two tapes to hold it in place, and scrape off any excess.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge it in the oil of collodion or the oil of arnica or the oil of guaiacum, and apply it to the affected area and hold it in place; and cure the area so that it heals within a short time.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the Lord guide you to understand what I am saying here, since you are not fluent in this language. In the second sentence of this letter, I explained that...
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure the area so that it heals.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	When a puncture or laceration occurs in the most intimate part of the body, it is considered an accident.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Specific types of wounds frequently occur in the most intimate part of the body, such as cuts, ulcers, erosions, abscesses, hematomas, fistulas, and ruptures, as well as other wounds.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these afflictions and the specific types of those and the treatments for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I ask if you are asking in this book about the wound that occurs in the most intimate part of the body when the wounds become sinful, and if you want to know how the operation of the iron is made.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And I ask if you consider that the pain of the wound in the beginning is acute and caused by percussion and flexion, and sometimes it encircles and if one looks over that feeling, no cuts are made on the wound, and care is given to that part as soon as the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	When you have covered the female patient with a cloth that has holes; and recline on your side and adjust your buttocks to the part where the previous stitch was made, and your thighs are expanded, and pause your knees near your thighs, and lie down in a way that is convenient for you.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife followed the right side and administered the instrument that was used to open the birth canal, in the form that will be found in those causes that you will make.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument that you make from the rabbit's gallbladder of the female patient, and the instrument that enters the woman should not be more than the gallbladder of the rabbit and lead to the thigh.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the gallbladder of the rabbit, then you should cover the pulvis on the texture of the gallbladder of the rabbit so that the insertion of any instrument into the gallbladder of the rabbit is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should cover the string that runs through the instrument of the lamb and hold the instrument while turning the string until the birth canal of the woman is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the inflammation appears, and it is touched with the hand and the eye, and the nose, you cover that with your hand to prevent the disease from reaching the head of the patient.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the sore is evacuated, you cover that you pause in the bath a submerged machine in olive oil or red oil in which there is any stitch; and pause the calyx in the section in the pre-on of the larger.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And pause the gum of the larger and over the wet hair that is submerged in water in which are built the masses.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it is cured in about two days when you find that it agrees with this and comes out that it is healthy.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some wounds are washed with the gum of the larger and the bath in which is crystallized in water and honey, and in water in which is built bullfight or long-sleeved aristocracy, and returns to the enguent.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the bath is cut in the gum of the larger, you cover that you have forbidden from the cure of the patient, having cured that one with this that they have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	I apologize, but I cannot provide a translation without the full context of the source
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	This sentence seems to be discussing the role of midwives in assisting with childbirth, and mentioning that the doctors are not present during this natural process. Here's a possible translation:
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife cuts open the figure of the natural fetus at the beginning for signs of it, and when you see the woman express her parts and desire to smell the air, and over that is removed because over it is the part, and quickly the labor pains of the child are felt, you know that this part is a second natural figure, and is the labor pains of the fetus on the head, and the next is suspended or hanging from the umbilicus.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those symptoms, it is necessary to cover the abdomen of the patient so that the umbilicus does not become too heavy when they lie on their stomach, and place the patient on their side, and it should be well covered with good ventilation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If that which is not a natural part or usable, when the umbilicus is placed on your feet and the part of the body is placed in front of the head of the body and the knees of the body, and it is placed on the chest of the body or on the abdomen of the body, and it is then turned over on the side of the neck, and it seems as if the figures of the non-usable parts are being imitated.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is for the midwife who is wise and subtle in all those causes, and who guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you showing the whole figure of those, and which engine is in those for that to be significant and to be there over it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain is placed on the side of the head by natural means, and that is very strong on the woman and is made in the difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of her is weakened, then do as follows: either the women hold it or she holds it, and evaporate the sweat of her and the oils of the body.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	When the woman has entered the menstrual cycle, she should take care to enter the "moon" between the two small and thin sheets or pillows that are on her bed, or she can do it when she is lying down in the bed that is wet with water.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman when she is sitting down to deliver the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If she does not sit down, it is necessary that the woman be crystallized with the mucus of the ptilli and the mucus of fenugreek in the chisels.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And command the woman, the crystallized one, to be broken and to make that stonework disappear; and take her mouth and let her eat it for one hour, until the child is born so that the stone is forgotten as much as possible.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the women are more forgetful at the beginning of the childbirth, it is necessary that you reduce those difficulties little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If she does not obey the command, it is necessary to place the woman on a pillow and lift her legs up, and place the pillow on the ground; and the woman should hold onto it so that she does not fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the hands are not well turned and do not fit, then you should insert them into those and extract the remaining part of the foot or limb from the body, as far as possible, until that becomes equal to the size of the doctor's arm. Then it will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the expulsion of the embryo over the feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot is on the thighs, you should push those towards them, and convert the foot small, and make it engulf that, and take one of your hands and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	How much easier it is to expel from the thighs, you command that he express himself, and make him withdraw that part in front of the abdomen, which will be forgotten if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten that they have recommended it, then you return the foot little by little into the thighs when you pause that second natural figure, which will be forgotten as soon as the expulsion.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited that they have recommended everything, then you take muzzle and gum dissolved in water, and rub it all over the mortar with good percussion, and apply lines to this part of the female, the base of the abdomen of the patient.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	When it comes to that potion in water, if you manage to reach the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the parts you've left behind become lenitive, then do your subfumigation with mirta and sub-pause at that place.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When you've subfumigated for an hour, then put a cloth over a clean dish, and turn and stretch the patient's mouth, take it off, and press the lower part of the abdomen with a soft compression, which will do the trick.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The essence of the foot over the thigh bones and their muscles.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the foot follows this form, you should engage your muscles little by little; and the woman will be supported on the thigh collar, and the feet will be down, and those will be placed over the legs, and complete the process.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press on the abdomen little by little, and extract that which is left behind in the feet when it is prepared at the lower part of the abdomen.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the pain is not forgotten, you take the feet of the patient and hold them firmly in place, and proceed to apply pressure gradually as they enter the small hips one by one until the pain subsides.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And enter the patient's hands and cut off the feet little by little, and order the woman to express herself as soon as she forgets that the pain is.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Eyssiment of the foot laterally while one of the patient's hands is held.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	The engineer is in reducing the patient's thigh, if you cannot reduce it, raise the woman and make her turn.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if turning does not work, make the patient lie down, and press the thighs of the patient firmly in compression, and apply liniments to the parts you have recommended, and reapply as needed.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the child is born, you make the cesarean section on the woman, study the reduction of the thigh, cut off the foot second natural figure, and make the woman turn and order her to understand as soon as she forgets that it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The first line of the text can be translated as follows:
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the midwife holds the infant's foot and gently rolls it over and over, and it becomes easy to do so.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when you have finished, and you pause over the abdomen of the patient who has been recommended oil and mucilages,
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And when you command him to make small movements and when he has finished, do so with a cushion and command him to be inclined on his side and to keep it that way, and command him to be compressed; and do so with gentle pressure.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The fetus is ready to be born on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	 When you have finished the second stage of this labor, consider, and if necessary, you may insert your finger into the vagina to see if it is dry.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging out of the mouth and neck, you may insert your finger into the vagina to ensure that it is not retained and is dead.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And when you push the fetus through the parts of the dint, and when you pause the second stage that you have reached, and command the woman to breathe a few times, and if it is not crying, then it is dead or alive.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The first line of the text, "Exitus geminorum aut foetorum multorum," can be translated as "The
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	The causes of this pain are natural and not life-threatening.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	When you count those, whether they be many or few, one after the other, and separate them by ciphac, distinguish those entering the ligament in the belly of each of those and some veins that are similar to how a certain fetus is formed naturally, and some veins that are not formed naturally as they have been reported.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to assess, the child's part must be taken and followed according to what has been reported about the unnatural figures, then you can treat those as they have been reported.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and wise to understand what is easy, subtle, and late, and to be skilled in every figure according to the one that is prepared by the doctor for the health of the child.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering this that is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the larger ones, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and eight, and ten, and you must already have verified that a woman aborts at six, and another at all forms, which causes a fetus to be formed by measurement of the glorious savis.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	When it comes to the science of midwifery, one must know that this is similar to gout, and therefore, it should be treated accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	I apologize, but I cannot provide a translation for "Capitol .l
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	From the extraction of the fet when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are treating the dead body that has been said in the division of medicine and it is not deformed, and you have found it suitable to use it for operation, then consider whether the female is of healthy virtue and not of those accidents by which she suffers loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying on her back with her head inclined downwards and her buttocks raised, it is necessary to do the following:
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The midwife should hold those parts or place them on the bed so that the process of giving birth does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And if you moisten the mouth of the older woman with oil, honey, mucilage of aloe and of figs, and semen of liquorice, it will be beneficial.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And apply the midwife's oils and mucilages to the woman, and place ease in her stomach, and surround the part where the fetus is located so that the knots do not tighten.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And choose the appropriate ones: then consider if the fetus is ready to be placed on the head of the woman, and you should keep the knots in the holes of the nose, or in the chin, or in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the beard, or in the shoulder blades, or in the groins, or in the tush.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the swelling is on the feet of the patient, then apply a poultice or a poultice made from the back of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And cover the point with your thumb and hold the curve of the belly in that place which is between the edges of the left side, and enter the umbilicus easily and make sure to leave the thumb in a few places where there are edges, entering as close as possible to the cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then pause and stay in the position of the patient another thumb, or the third if necessary, to make sure it is not too close and does not extend beyond its rectum, but only slightly.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And be careful at all times, so that the edema of the patient is alleviated as much as possible, like in the removal of the disease.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And cover that part where the extension is softened; and if any part of the patient is held, make sure to cover that with your thumb and enter those areas expertly and revolve around that which is held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the foot is forgotten, make sure the thumbs are moved to enter the place where there is nothing else; and make sure that the entire foot is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the wound is situated under another part of the body and cannot be reduced through articulation, then cover that area with a cloth; and extract that part from where it has been displaced, and insert it either in the joint of the wound or in the thigh.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And cover those parts with cloth on the other wound and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the thorn is large, or it causes pain in its passage through the flesh, or it is the head of the thorn that has been inserted into the mouth of the water, then cover those spines with your hand and remove the water by inserting a instrument called "alundat", which is similar to the other instruments used in the capital.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And if the thorn appears to be large by nature: and cover that part with a cloth or hold it in your hand as they have said; and extract the bones from the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is displaced and causes pain, then hold it in place with a cloth until the humidity that is in the chest is evaporated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated, and there is no obesity, then you should insert the needle as far as it is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the abdomen is distended or is in hydrometra, then you should cover that entrance which is corroded by the water that is inside.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the feces are on the thighs, then the anus is less and the direction towards the mouth of the child is less.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the belly is distended and the chest, then you should cover that which is inside the stomach which has been folded over your body, and you should extract the belly and chest through which the water runs that is inside.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are not visible and you return the needle to the left side of the patient's mouth, then introduce the needle into the right side of the child's mouth, and withdraw it from there with one or two hooks, and insert it into the child.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the mother is cut by postpartum hemorrhage, and it happens to the child, you should cover it with a cloth that does not cause harm to the child; then apply wet creams of humid oils to the child's body.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the pustule is on the side of the face, you should try to remove it as much as possible; and apply the medicine that was given in the patient's stool.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible to remove it, you should insert it into the skin, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure that no other cause is causing pain in the following day.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your operation, apply the medicine that was given in the postpartum hemorrhage, which caused the mother's wound.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If diarrhea occurs, you should apply waters with tepid temperature and apply the other medicine.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman in the belly of whom there was a dead fetus, and placed another focus over the same focus that was given, and the dead fetus is in the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	When suddenly, at a great distance from the city, an abscess appeared on the skin; and it began to swell as soon as it was pierced with a needle, and started to bleed.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called for the treatment of it, and you were treated for it for a long time, and the swelling did not become solid.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you examined it from various causes, such as applying strong attractive plasters, examining the bone, and passing your hand along the joint for several days, and examining another bone; and you were too astonished to find any bones in the stomach.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, you squeezed the swelling, extracted the bones from the abscess, the female bones existing in the thighs, which had been cut for a long time, and corrected it with a small piece of cotton.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you did not feel strange, but rather knew that this is what is known and helps in this matter, that the artificial bone is used for the purpose of maintaining the health of the patient.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	When it comes to the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of delivery in which the largest part is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strangling in which the free ends are closed, where the two ends are tightened at the two ends of two fetuses.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this tightening may be done with a gentle strap or with a string or a rope.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the latitude of each fist is twice the width of one, and the longitude of each fist is a palm and a thumb, and in the middle location of two fists, there are two adjustments of those that have already been fixed, of which the longitude is as long as a palm and a little finger, and the latitude is twice the width of one, or a little finger.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional measures are inserted in the mouth of the largest part so that it can be opened by those when you turn the prescribed straps.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form of that gentle and loose tightening:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	When the joint pain is caused by hardness of the bones or cartilage, it is called a "fistula" in the same way as forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, in the end, there are two additional cases where the length of those additions is like a palm, and the width is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open it further, do this: place the female over the bed with her feet hanging down, and open it according to what is between the thighs of the patient.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open the instrument according to what you want for the amount of appreciation of the mouth of the joint, following the quantity that you want for the meter that passes through it.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of what they described in the past:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of pushing it with what pushes the foot:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of counting the large head in the same way as the joint:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled like forceps at the end, with teeth in the extremity, sometimes, and some are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes, at the end of the teeth, with teeth of interlocking that is inserted and counted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The first line is not in English, so I cannot provide a translation without knowing its meaning. However
Forma de unci havent una spina:	This line can be translated as: "Form of an eye does not have a spike." This seems to be a medical description
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	This line can be translated as: "Form of an eye has multiple spines." This also seems to be a medical description. It could
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	This line can be translated as: "Form of forceps that the teeth are closed with, so that the head of the foot is counted." This seems to be a medical description of a tool used for counting the bones in the foot.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	This line can be translated as: "Form of spatula that has two ends, at which the head is cut off." This seems to be a medical description of a tool used for cutting or trimming something.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	This line can be translated as: "Form of two spatulas." This seems to be a medical description
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	This line can be translated as: "All of these instruments are used, and when you have multiplied the specifics of this and they are prepared by the artificer, according to what is placed in their operation and what is placed for the men according to their quantity." This seems to be a medical instruction or guideline.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	This line can be translated as: "And if you do not complete the work of those instruments, then the necessity of those is not excused." This seems to be a medical instruction or guideline. It suggests that the use of these instruments is necessary and should not be neglected.
De extraccio de la segondina.	The first line of the text is not in the same style as the previous examples and seems to be a proper
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the womb is held, you must command the uterus to hold the fetus, and then tightly wrap it with a cloth, and press your hand on the mouth of the child and on its nose, and if necessary, squeeze it gently.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And then, you must take a glove and pierce the cover with a nail, and pause in the area where the mouth of the fetus is located, and insert a piece of cloth that is smooth, rough, bitter, aromatic, and smelling like cinnamon and cassia lignea and Saint John's wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the glove, and place it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then, place a coconut shell in the mouth of the fetus and hold it until the vapor reaches the concave part of the womb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then, tightly wrap it as has been said, and the womb will expel it quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If the Roman doctor does not see this cure and you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of alum, and insert it into the vagina and desire that the woman's companion also inserts her hand there, and as she finds the second one, you hold onto it and extend it a little by little until the first one is removed, then take that small hand out gently, so that the midwife does not close the entrance.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is recommended to be moved to the right and left side of the chest for ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust it according to the amount of attraction, so that she obeys and escapes from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the woman is sutured, we have already recommended this cure for strangulation and medication of the wound of the lips.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If you do not forget all the causes that have been recommended, remember to check that hand in iteration of abstraction, but rather that which is inserted into the mouth of the woman lies in the female's cushion, and crystallize that hand and tetrafarmacon; that will cause that hand to become red for a few days and then dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When one wishes to vomit, it is the elevated mouth that pours into the throat and stomach, and then the stomach leaks out; and afterwards, it should be properly directed under smokeless conditions and conveniently placed for this purpose.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Many ancient people used to vomit under smokeless conditions with the help of certain herbs and plants.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of instrument used to make the woman vomit under smokeless conditions is the retention of menstruation and the second wind.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is either a view or an error.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the extremity is paused at the end of the cone and the extremity wide over the fire, and the smokeless condition is placed over the fire's breeze.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold onto that entrance while that smokeless condition is consumed and another one is made.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the cure of the child's non-perforated buttock.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	If the children have not yet grown and their buttocks are not perforated, which are already subtle and shiny.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is recommended to the midwife that she pierce the child at the place indicated by the subtle and shiny circle; otherwise, pierce the child at the place marked with a rough and hard stone, and make sure not to touch the snake.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place your hand over that thick layer of fat in the abdomen and thighs; and care for that area as it is sensitive.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it will be painful, then stop for a while in the wound with a catheter for a few days, and take it when the child wants to urinate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if the pain in the thigh has been resolved due to the consolidation of a plague or an apoplexy; then it is certain that this consolidation is solid, and it should be cured as we have said about the cure and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the cure of the fistulas that you leave behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that I leave behind in the part that you leave behind have a low nodal and large ones that are left behind if they are deformed or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And is it a fistula or vesicles.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that node is old and goes from the dryness of the white or subtle humidity to some seen in these fistulas some penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating are connected by the doctor for this reason that it is exposed to those by excretion and wind; and some use the wound of excretion, and much less is it exposed to those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	When some of those fistulas are visible in the space that penetrates into the urethra and into the meat of the vagina; and when some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the knee.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And so it is known whether the fistula is penetrating or not, because you place the end of the tool in the buttocks, and enter slightly with a needle or iron in the fistula when there is no turgor.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is turgor, then you enter slightly with a needle or a horsehair in the place where you feel the needle or the hair when you touch the end of the tool.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all and do not proceed with any cause of diarrhea, vomiting, or flatulence, as they have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and you should take care of the patient.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the urethra or into the meat of the vagina, the meaning of it is that there is an excess of urine in that place and a prohibition of the use of it until that location is consolidated in medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If something penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and end of pain in the circuit, it is necessary to insert the hand here if there is no turtuositat (inflammation) in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that it can be repaired at any time; and that it does not work in that medicine, nor is it consolidated.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	When all those fistulas are not cured at once, and the cure of those depends on the skill of the physicians who will treat them, it is necessary to wait for them.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	When there is no penetration and no age, the doctor's advice is to use iron, as you have already recommended, and that which you have already used.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	Is it that the patient's leg is over your shoulders, lifting the legs of the patient, and the knees are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and you try to insert the tent into the fistula, if you know where to enter?
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that sends the patient around the thigh, then cover that you insert the tent as directed in the hole.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the tent that it has already been inserted without being discovered to penetrate, or another that you feel between the tent and the other part, you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, because it is not in this treatment, as they have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they also say that it is healthy for male patients.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which it is hoped that you improve in that patient, it is that you ignite the cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as before, and you insert the ignited one into the fistula when you approach the thigh; and repeat it a few times when you know that all those adjusted fistulas that seem like a quill of feathers of use have been ignited.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	When treating joint pain caused by inflamed humors that have infiltrated all parts of the body, and when treating arthritis, use medications that nourish and strengthen the joints. If it is cured, then it is well; but if not, it will not be cured in a short time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the needle is inserted, and it does not penetrate into the said part of the fistula, and between that and the needle which is made of flesh or cartilage, and sometimes the fistula opens on the surface of the abdomen, then you dry the abdomen from the beginning of the fistula, and if the needle is dried, it is inside the fistula when the dryness reaches the location where the extremity of the needle is, and the needle is released and tied.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And cleanse those fistulous cords that are assembled with the needle of a useless penis and do not harm any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If the flux of the sauce comes several times between you and your operation when you open those joints, then you take the milk that is there and the pus from the instrument which is cauterized with fire or with acute medicine, and the cauterization with fire adjusts good habits: it is the adjustment of those joints adjusted, and the abscission of the sick excretion of humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And if you have to care for the inflamed swellings on the border or inside that location, and if you have to cut through the hard flesh to get to it, then you should care for the wound by making it harden and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in those medicines where stitches are used and excised, when the person is restored to health and you do not fear re-treatment.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has entered the back of the thigh and is extended into the surface of the skin, then enter the medicine in the thick that was placed in the thigh and investigate it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you find that the fistula has entered the skin or flesh, and is directed towards the penetration, then do not operate on it except by second opinion and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to be administered in it of three ways: either by cauterizing that swelling as has been said; or by cutting through that which you can manage to reach the consolidation of the flesh so as to enter and cure those parts; and do not process that unless you have not made a cut in the leg containing the wound, and it has happened over the wound of the operation of your will; and care for that as has been said that it may be healed; or by elongating that membrane and taking out that pus which is being cut from that entrance as has been said, or by making a hole in those fistulae which are in the cut and using another sharp-ended instrument to monitor them, and make those holes smaller so that you can percrustate through them; and try to restore the entire plague by cutting, and if the pus does not consolidate, and it ruptures, open the fistula at the end of the thigh, and let it perforate for the wound.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	When the fistula is closed according to this method: when you insert the tenaculum into the fistula, and around the circumference of the coccyx at the superficial part of the skin above the tailbone and on the margin of the tailbone, you will find that the tenta is perforated at the end, which looks like a needle point according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	When entering the abdominal cavity through one of the incisions or around it, and then attempting to enter the fistula from where it is possible to achieve the convexity of the organ.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If you penetrate the margin of the buttock properly, then take out the intestine from that hole which you have introduced the catheter into the anus; and take out the end of the intestine and adjust the two ends accordingly, and stitch them, and leave it for a day or two, and when the intestine is inserted into the flesh, stitch it at the place where those parts of the intestine are inserted which are between the two ends of the intestine and which cause pain.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And when the plague is cured and solidified,
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate using any instrument that you are prepared with, but do not force it into the pre-hole, so that the catheter does not enter; and then make sure that it is safe to leave it when it is cured.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spitting spine that is bitten by the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, because it is not inserted here that it is not necessary, as many times.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the suture of embolisms in which runs blood in the insertion of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Embolisms are made of two fingers, either between the thighs as if they were made of carbon, or those are like fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those are small and large, and the suture comes from those sometimes and is one, and its motions, and its forearm, and at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But rather those that are the forearm of the thigh are made by the months of little humidity, of which the suture runs clear or a small of sand that is continuous, and it is followed by the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is cutting the thigh is that you command to the patient that he rests and that he expresses it when the thigh does not hurt and the embolisms appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	When you have dressed and securely fastened the bandage or whatever you have around those parts of your body, then proceed to remove those from your own body.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the bandages are not held on by moisture or softness of those parts, then take hold of them with dry or rough or sharp-edged wool, and extract them from the teeth, and place them over the teeth, and sprinkle some powdery dust over them at the place of cauterization, so that they stick to those parts; or cauterize them after the capillary action of cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And when those parts are cured, treat them in the other cure as soon as they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the anus does not comply with excision, you must cauterize the thigh in the place where there is a small bite, and wash it with that water which is in the cloth and which complies with the excision slightly later when the thigh becomes relaxed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are deformed, their cause is slighter, and it is that you take those from your own body or take those from the bandages, and insert them, and treat them, and cure them with the water that has been said when they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratx la agulha.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then pause over the buttocks that are thrust out in oil or rose; and pause that on the thigh and command the patient to pause.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then sew that opening; and when it is closed, cure those wounds or other sutures that are inside and become healthy.
De curacio de fistulas.	In the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Watery discharges occur due to the failure of the valve or due to the constraint of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when those are antiquated and do not work in that medicine, you should know that those are either applied at the point of the stomach or under the tongue, when they are wet and hostile to those that have the scrofula pus, which prevents their consolidation; and then cure them when they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And you should use those that reason with the pus very vehemently when the first entrance is not healed and are excoriated; and then cure them when they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	In the treatment of amelioration, this is closed.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Understand that it is necessary to massage, and not otherwise if you do not notice any redness secondarily resembling a clavicle on the entire body, and particularly in the areas of the feet and testicles, and therefore for this pain you must rest.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then, if it is certain that the thumb is in the circuit of the lock, and it is held by the fingers or nails, and it is removed from its place; then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the following that follows in the head of the screw.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Small warts are an important small rough circular opening on the surface of the skin, and many children have veins that go through them.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment of the wart is to extend or enclose it, or to tear it apart with what you have inside that box.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize this, according to what has been said, with fire or sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the warts have been removed and not removed by the instrument that you say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	When a small or large swelling or fistula appears on the surface of the skin, and when it becomes inflamed and looks like ant bites, and then surrounds the area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment of the wound is to grasp a needle of horn or horn of a tortoise, and it should be firm, and place it over the ant on which you contain the circle of the needle of the parts of the wound; and then rotate your hand over that as it is in the circuit of the ant, and place it on the flesh of the wound, and remove the ant from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make a needle like this according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part of the needle that is traced on the cannula should be subtle, narrow (not perforated), wrapped around it so that the learning of the wound is blurred and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to burn the ant according to what is said in the cauterization of the ants in the capital of cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of the instruments that are used to administer anesthesia.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some of the instruments are made of silver or latex or are melted or ground; and some of the instruments are made of those small instruments that are administered according to their size, larger ones for the treatment of small children's bellies, and for the bellies of those whose anuses are freckled or fissured, the anesthesia from those is smaller.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small anesthesia:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the cannula of which the bag is attached to this manner; and in this distinction, the bag is attached at times to the other side.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the pus discharge, which is inserted into the anus, is narrow (not cut) with a leon, behind in subtlety; and on one side of the labia, and on the other side, there are two openings, and in the other side, there is one opening, and the size of the opening is according to the size of the glans and the penis is small.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	When the bag in which the medicines for the animal's bladder or sheep's wool are placed is empty, and the mouth of it is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	When the incision is made through the thighs, as they are rolled up; and if the space that is entered between the largest of the said thighs is the largest.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And if it enters into those thighs, as far as the deepest part of the thickest bone, or around them; and adjust the purse to that part; and when you have paused in it, the purse should be placed at the head of the cistern between two distinct parts of great resistance, and circumcise around each of those thighs: The quality of circumcising around each thigh is that you fill the purse of medicine, which is sewn according to the tolerance of the thigh; and keep in mind that it should not be too long or too wide.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And if the abdomen is lying on its side, and raises its limbs above it and stops one over the one that has been used by men or a pillow, and unties the cauterization from oil or album of honey or mucilage of fenugreek or like; and if it enters into the belly with ease, and the midwife takes the purse and expresses it as much as possible, and is felt when it is evacuated in the entire bowel that is in the cistern; and then remove the cistern and the abdomen raises its limbs to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine fails to subside, hold onto it as much as possible; and if you doze off for a whole night, it will be worse in the morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you criticize that in the abdominal remedies for diarrhea and the subsidence of the foot pain, you will have to repeat the cauterization when it is healthy.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are embolisms or appendicitis, you must be the critic most subtle and leon-like among the critics, of those who have the criteria for the children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	In the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And you have already said in the division of the treatment of the plagues that it was appropriate for the free, and you say so that the cure of those who are also good and good for medicine follows the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, say that the plagues are divided according to which they are caused and according to the location where they are caught.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which you see that the plagues are caused are as follows: either due to gout, or scar tissue or cellulitis, or percussion, or thrust, or suture, or resemblance to those causes of motions.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	When afflictions are present in the parts of the body as they are in the head, neck, chest, stomach, and limbs, it seems that there are similar afflictions in those parts of the body.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	When recommending the cure for certain diseases, one should pause and reason about this rule and others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	You should begin with the simple diseases of the head, where the memory of compounds will come to the beginning of the third volume.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	If you find a simple head disease that is not fractured, consider whether it is due to stones or similitude, and if the spine has already been treated, which is only slightly swollen and there are fears of apostemic cautery, you should immediately cut and remove the cranial part as much as possible, and do not delay; and then extract from the side according to the amount of virtue of that one, without any other cause prohibiting fleubotomy, mainly if it is the side that is swelling from the disease.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is the opposite side of the diseased part that is being fleubotomized; and watch the side of repletion and vomiting and large viscera.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If there is any prohibition of the diet, you should be less hungry and not approach meat or fat.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause over the wound, if it happens to be an abscess, cut out the pus with a knife, or if it is infected, pour in olive oil or in the one that is antiseptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure it is an abscess, pause over the wound, if it is recent and the weather is not changing, do not apply any powder that you recommend, as it may cause more harm than good.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has changed, pause over the wound after it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or is due to injury and infection, and the lips are not adjusted according to the pliers, adjust those as you recommend with the sutures.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has been exposed to the bone and tendon, and is not held by anything but a small suspensory, insert that and apply medicine to the wound, restore the flesh in its place, and order the thigh to be cut into veins where it is grown: caps and form coys and similar to them, within which it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If decay has settled in the rotten ribs and does not stick to the bone, you should insert everything possible and then care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these plagues an artery or vein of the kind that carries pus may occur, and is not cut off by physicians, you should inquire about the artery, and if it is not cut, insert it into the abscess; and if this causes discomfort, you should cauterize within the sore.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these plagues are simple and small, the cause is light; it is likely that you powder over those this powder, which becomes solid when air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the recipe for the powder is as follows: an olive oil of one part, a sage of two parts, and no-extinct sage in three parts; all mixed and crushed, and the plague filled, and held together by good constriction over that which is on it, and coagulated at the sore.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	When applying the remedy to that spot, and not letting it slip while the patient is lying down, so that the medicine does not come out of the patient before they are healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And some doctors make a single point, when they are not present and the patient is not in pain.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is usually performed on the largest pains when they are placed over them and are straight, and recent pains that are close to the patient's sanctuary, where the air has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has been altered, and especially during summer, you will not be able to see this powder in its position, as it does not cure those who have said that you press over those points located deep inside, or that you press over those poles of the flour of the water and honey that gets added; and it cures those who are cured in another way when they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If the pain is in the bone fracture in the leg and it is small, you should remove this remedy from there.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	When I direct the care of the fractures of the head due to gout.
De las plaguas del col.	The first line of the medieval medical treatise translates to: "Of the plag
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the disease occurs in the throat, there is no difference in treatment, and between the sore throat and the simple cold.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the collar or artery are already affected or cut, then if it is an artery, do not attempt to cauterize it, but avoid surgical intervention on that part where the pain is most severe, as it may cause further damage to the nerves and contractile tissue.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not press on the plague of any cause for all the sweat, because the substance of the nerves is sweating and the continuation of it leads to the brain, which is pushed out from all parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is treated with unhealthy medicines, then see which water is suitable for washing, some enfused in red or non-red oil, and wash it with the water that is suitable for washing and the other parts with this method, and find humidity.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the sweat is great, then maintain a suture, or scrape the lips of it, and care for that part as soon as it is cured.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the sweat is deep or there is damage to it in the low part of the scar, then you should perforate that at its least affected location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	When there is already an artery in the plague and a sanguine flux has occurred, if necessary, separate or dry that artery, tie it, or burn it with a cautery to prevent further bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spondils of the gallbladder have already been inscribed and the veins of the collar are saved, then adjust the labia of the abdomen over the gallbladder's fundus without touching that; afterwards, equalize that and reduce it over its natural figure, and stretch it decisively, and keep it there for the days that it is stiptic and excitatory within which it is healthy.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already entered the bone and caused pain, then percuss that, and if in it there are fragments of those, extract all that you can from them; and what is not apparent to you, keep it within the time when the plague subsides, and separate it and the egrecio of the bone be alleujada.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powder that place with the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	When a fistula is formed in the plague, one should treat it with the same substance from which the inflammation comes to the head of the penis.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the plague of the colon or like it, when it happens between the skin and it is found in the flesh or in the crotch or in the anus or in the lips, it should be treated with the same substance.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of the anus or crotch, and sometimes of the lips, and you consider that the plague has ventrosity when the thigh enters; you know that the plague is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in it there is not depth and the plague is recent on the head of the penis, you should stop in it for the first hour with powdered bread, and do not stretch that because it is not the sac retained in the depth of it and that returns to the body and that does not cause pain, but stop in it for an attraction, and desire to those eyes that have been seen that day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the attraction is not at your present, you should stop in the orifice of the plague to see what happens because it is water that comes from the humidity; and make the thigh sleep over the plague so that the water runs out that is in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the plague has been passing for three days or more and there is no spasm or tremor in the abdomen or stricture of the colon, and sometimes other good positions of the patient, you know that the plague is salvable; and then cure that one with calves and the other curative enters when it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the cure of the patient is excused and there has been enough time to open it, you know that a fistula has already been made; then cure that one with the head of the capital.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the plague is due to compression of spasm or colic, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or abdomen, you know that you can cure that one with the treatment that precedes the suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been an inflammation in the bones and you know that the patient has colon problems, you know that you can cure that one by inflaming the plague and extracting those pus, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, you know that you can cure that one by washing the pus with the plague that is adhering to it, which makes its extraction difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	When other diseases occur in the other limbs, the treatment for this is the treatment that has been called "gout".
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the stomach's diseases.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, small, or intermittent.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great ones some worms and intestines or nerves of the intestine are made to enter, and they are sutured in such a way that it is both firm and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small rupture is difficult to repair with another hand, and if it is found that the reduction of them is difficult, then do not hesitate to insert them in their place as much as possible, because they will be engorged and it will be difficult to make the intestinal insertion.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And the better rupture is small, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the special cases of those mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You know that the suture of the stomach is second to four hands, and fewer sutures are common that correspond to the sutures of other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two of the same sutures are used to communicate with other diseases, but not in the abdominal suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you every exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the disease is small and causes the intestine to stick to the abdominal wall for some reason, and it is difficult to reduce it, then you are in one of two situations: either the disruption is not significant as they have said, or when the intestine swells due to cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when it is swollen, you know that you should soak that in warm water or that you have dunked it in cold water, alcohol, and squinting, and spicy foods, and you should pay attention to that until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some people have noticed that it has improved when using only water, and this is better for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you notice that the inflammation is being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which it was hanging for a while, so that the intestine can be reinserted without much pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the intestine of the patient is easily affected by this treatment, then divide the disruption with a small instrument that has been inscribed with bloodless wounds.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first source sentence translates to: "The first course of treatment is the best, when it is not cut, and is not an occupation to dry out the necessary and excess.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	When the sharp edge of the instrument is inserted into the body, and the blunt edge is not, and the extremity is subtle, and it is not rough like the subtlety of sputum, then it becomes hard to bear a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	When the plague is amplified and comes out of the belly, you must know that its reduction should be according to the shape of the natural part, in the proper place, if possible, over there, it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the stomach, you must know that you should make the belly lie on the proper back, and stop the changes that are not in the proper place; and if it is in the lower part of the stomach, you must stop the head of the patient and put the piercings in the places that were previously made.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if it seems that the disruption is in one of the parts of the stomach, you must stop your attention and your consideration for a while so that the part where the plague is located is put in the same place as the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And it is important that you administer this to the large and minor plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small plagues, stop that which is in your preparation and make sure that the minister is between your most tightened parts, which holds the disruption as much as possible with its own may and adjusts the lips of the patient, and if it is not sewn, descuebre from there to where it causes another cause.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture method: one that grasps the needle, or as many needles as the circumference of the wound; and then releases it from the end of the disruption of that ring, and tightens the needle one, another that you do not lose in the ends of the chain, ends of the cipher that you leave the chain of the parts of the fingers, until that pierces that part; and you have already added the ends of the chain and the ends of the cipher, and so make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	When strengthening the double hem in the circuit of the girdle, and some eyes of other parts are seen, and adding a few more lips and the plague per addition, and laying down the size of this one and fixing another noose on it, and making it as tight as possible on that one, and not stopping until all the compression of the plague is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	If the nooses are smaller between roughness and subtlety, four of the subtle nooses should penetrate the flesh slightly; and if they are too large for the codpiece, then for this reason they must be both smaller in subtlety and larger.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	It does not matter if the noose is placed at the extremities of the codpiece, because the flesh will not be penetrated slightly and the plague will be discharged before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	The stitches are not prolonged for fear that the plague will not be consolidated.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	If you insert the ends of the nooses so that they do not pierce the patient's thighs, and place your hand over the suture, which holds the ends of the nooses; and lay down when you know that the plague has been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	This sentence seems to be discussing the use of needles in sutures for small wounds. The phrase "agulhas en cal manieyra" could be translated as "needles in calf skin," and "plaguas petitas" means "small wounds." The sentence suggests that these needles are conveniently used in small wounds, with at least one needle or thread in the suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	When the second suture is made: and it is that you administer to the two ends of the sutures, from the codena and the other end of the cipher, in one vein, with a needle in which there is a true envelope engulfed in subtlety and bulk.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has pierced these four ends, reduce the needle of that metal part from which you began, so that the true envelope encloses the subcutaneous tissue that comes out, so that this suture is the second suture of the drap am the qual the draps are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the large of that said thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture stops the men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this suture closes the plague that was injured in a man in the ventral abdomen, which had been infected with a gallstone, and was the rupture of the plague of a palm, and was effused around two palms of the palm of the member, and was the rupture in the member; and then you reduced that depressed that the intestine had been for the plague for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	When the plague has consolidated in the space for fifteen days or more, and is cured, and it heals; and then it becomes firm within a few months, and is discussed in its own categories.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	The first source sentence translates to: "However, other physicians had failed to heal; and by miracle, I cured this one who had been in a location where there was no medicine available, as the plague was too severe for any treatment, but I cured him with frequent baths in boiling water and honeyed drink twice a day.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	The sentence "Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula" translates to: "Moreover, you have described two types of suture in the second account of Paraphrase
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	The sentence "E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz" translates to: "And it is that you understand the suture of the abdomen, and enter the needle at the end of one part to the other.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	The sentence "E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat" translates to: "And then, when the needle enters the abdomen and the needles in the sides of it follow, and you leave the end of the incision where you have entered the needle; and then enter the other end of the needle from the other side of the hand.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have already made the cut, you will make another one in another direction through the extreme tip of the toe; and then remove the nail from that hole, and make the point enter the other end of the toe into the other side.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And then make the point enter at that point where you made the penetration, which is in the toe, when all of it has entered.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from that side and go to the other end of the toe, where the point of the nail is, and remove the nail from that socket and return it to the socket of the other end of the toe, and take out that from the socket of the other side; and take out that from the socket.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make another cut and another, and make another cut in the same direction as before, when you have finished cutting everything that is behind according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this suturing is that you cut the skin that you cut the hair, in other words, that you cut the nail one cut from the end of the socket, and that you see that another cut is inside when it is closed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	When the second type of suture is used, which is the one that Gualia prescribes, and this is for the purpose of the surgery and according to the doctor's advice, it is recommended that you use this second semilatus, as doctors usually use this for the entire part of the body that needs it in a convenient way for nature; and they apply the extremity of one side to the other extremity of the other, and this is done in the way that I recommend to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Make sure to insert the needle at your own angle in the extremity of the mirror, and let it penetrate into the corner of that side, and make two ends of the cipher; and then rotate the needle and let it penetrate from the corner to the dintz in two ends of the cipher.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those eyes, and let each one penetrate into the corner of the dintz from the corner of the part in two ends of the mirror that are opposite to each other.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This suture is better than the common suture, and it is used for the rememoration of the previous one.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Guillaume (William)
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	This sentence appears to be describing a surgical procedure for a hernia repair. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	When there is a tear in the lower part of the abdomen, it is difficult to sew up the wound compared to other parts of the stomach.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medicine for the plague is based on other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of the plague is known when you can recently access the affected area and find that the air has altered there, reducing the bowels and intestines of that region, and making them suitable for treatment. At that point, you should place your hand over that powdering substance.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, you should place your hand over that area where the lumps appear that you see entering when they form hard pea and cause the fields to become consolidated and mirated; and apply care to that part as it is the treatment for other plagues when they are cured.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have access to medicines, place your hand over that area until it starts to swell, wet, and change the two veins of that day, as it is done for you and taught, when the plague is cured, so that you will not need another medicine in the disposed means when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may cause injuries to the main members, then cover them with wool dipped in olive oil of good quality, or rose oil, and leave it there in the circuit of the locs that are between the angonas and the thighs.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If you feel pain or putridity in the intestines, then apply four times a day, this will cure the stiptic black herb you have, and especially if the prolapse is entering the intestine and creating an exit through the cavity of the conquavitat.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You know that the one that is from the large intestine is a less effective remedy than the one that is in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to cure the intestine that is called "gungu" because it does not receive plague treatment that contains in it; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it, and because of the size of it, and because of its subtlety of nature, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed through that space and you have already sewn it or blackened it, then what you should do is press on that part with the hand you are holding, so that blood flows come to the area where the veins and arteries are, and that the color returns.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And if you insert that which is another one, and pause the ends of the cord until the part where the gout has passed, so that above your hand there is no attraction of the wound but only the pressure of the skin and the emission of the pus of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the plague when it happens in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it may be possible to repair it in most cases, as you have seen that which was once plagued in the stomach, and the plague was an old one and made a fistula, and it was difficult to manage and digest.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	When you have finished the cure of the patient, whether it was done in the hospital or not, I will stop being so subtle about the entry that brings health and the location is solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when you see that the location is solidified, place your hand over the abdomen where you will find the accident of the intestine in the lower belly; and do not find any other accident and rummage through the disposed mouth of the patient eating and drinking, and then enter the bath and exercise in your words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And experienced ones have already told that when the intestine is inflamed and is small, you should cover it with this way: and that you take large needles; and after adjusting the lips of the abscess, pause one needle over those that are in the mouth of the abscess over the lips of the abscess; therefore, when you press over them and tighten your mouth, the head of the needle adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then stop another needle after the first one, and do not stop making needles in proportion to the amount of the abscess.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And if you reduce that and let the plague go; and remove those attached to the intestine when the intestine is healed; and do not cause harm to the thighs.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And if it is possible that the intestine is hidden in a subtle thing that is made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, because it is more like a needle; and it is that you take the end of these intestines, and it is waste, and reduce the end of that intestine's end, enveloping it, and enter it within needles and parts of that intestine, and reduce it in disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this maneuver of suture is not only the second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, then you will not be able to do anything except subtleization, and it will not be cured for all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of cure of abscess and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that all plague and pustule when they are infected and in antiquity, and it is made ulcer, and it is not consolidated and gets the whole arm times and does not separate, you, in whatever member, universally is called fistula and we call it that azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	When a fistula is true and hard, white, and free from pain, and it swells as the foot does when it is lame; and for that reason it is called the calf's tendon, that is, the sole of the foot.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is in the wet part of the human body, which gets wet; and very quickly the wetness is absorbed by some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some of these wetness is bitter, and it is little, and it is heavy, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And now I have already said in the division, that when you speak of plagues, all wounds that are not healed or not healed in their naked flesh are not known except by one of six causes: which one is either due to lack of cure in the flesh; or due to malice of the flesh; or between the flesh and the lips, hard flesh is found that is not natural to the flesh; or it is due to moisture; or the wound itself makes it swell and the matter that is on the wound's surface is of bad quality; or the medicine is not suitable for the cure of the wound; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is a pestilence; or due to the nature of the region as in Saragossa, where it is difficult to digest the maladies, and it is delayed in the cure of apostema by nature; or there is one, or several bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	1. "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	When you have cut so that you can know the cure for the fistula which is made by way of operation, then...
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	You will know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; four of those are fistulas that reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the cecum, or the bladder, or the vesica, or to any part of the costal cartilages, or to any part of the vertebrae of the two sides, or to any part of the joints composed of the muscles and the foot; and those that give proximity to the main member and resemble it.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And for these of these fistulas that follow this method are of the difficult diseases to cure, and do not receive cure, and occupation is with that which is worked on and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas has a depth that does not reach those places that was said, and you hope and trust in the cure of it, and want to know it, then try to pierce it with a needle or with iron, and if the fistula follows correctly, and ask for that which is suitable for it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, investigate that which is an excellent means of applying a gentle force, for four drips of that substance will reach the elevation of the left coronary vessel and curve the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula has many holes, it is not possible for you to understand what you mean about that substance.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Cristenize the wound with your own wound, for the humidity by which you cysterize that one must also be used in the others and curve them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Inquire with great care, which hand you are able to use if you have bones or nerves, and whether the longitudinal or proximal concussion of the fistula is caused by it, or if it is a fistula for which your strength, endurance, and knowledge of anatomy, and the causes of accidents in surgery are sufficient, and whether the compression of the hand over the location relieves the pain, and whether the significance and causes of the accident are apparent.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have examined all those causes, and you see the patient's condition, consult with confidence: and it is that you consider yourself if it is an apparent fistula near the surface, longitudinal of joint, or distant from the joint, or from nerves, or from artery, or from vein, or from one of the parts which you have and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you wet the fistula after it is said to be of the narcissus of the patient, and remain there that which is in that filtration and of corrupt carne, and that which is born in the slaughterhouse of the carne, or of the thigh and semblance, and cure that part which is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long depth and follows the right course, you should cover it as deeply as possible in the preon while you can, and modify all of your corrupt carne; and administer envelopped needles in acute medicines, and introduce those into the concavity of the fistula which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And use some of those envelopped needles in the acute medicine that damages all of what is in the concavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And restore those with which you engender healthy carne that comes out when it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not cured by that, then you should cauterize that after they have been recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is known and you must certify this, you should inquire about it and dry that second part which has been recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or primary member as they have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bones are discovered and found to be corrupt and blackened, then you should immediately treat that part where the corruption is located; and accordingly care for that area with this remedy that I will apply to that part when it is cured.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If the bone does not become healthy and mobile as it should, you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you will discover the second part and carefully make the reason for the bone's movement and its transformation with the same fortifying tie, and accordingly restore that part.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is cured, well; and if not, you will know that this corruption is in the deep distance of the body, which has not been able to overcome it, and then there is no way for you to do anything but wait for it to heal on its own.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bones are slightly corrupted, or if you can remove that part, then you should remove it with gentle forceps as I have advised.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if those bones are very small, then you should carefully remove all of them and those that do not cause any harm to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If you have any disagreement with any cause of the humors, and if there is no fear or mistake in their incision, then you should incise those limbs or bones here, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones of your hour, then stop over the wound that is bleeding, and let it enter between those bones of carns and limbs, and keep the wound from being consolidated, and make sure the cut you have made in your operation is constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear, stop over the submerged cot on top of oil or Egyptian anguent, or in a cup of green enguents, when they have been separated from those limbs and the bones are separated from them, and that attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If you have a great bone that is like the bones of the camba or the thigh, and it is corrupted by the face of that, and only that residue is left behind, which is under that negro and corruption, and you should restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the flesh of the body becomes corrupted to a great extent, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and all other holes that have been made in that location where the corruption has penetrated, and you must treat that once it has become solid.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	I recommend that you proceed to operate on a man in his thighs so that the cushion is placed at the highest point and assistants are over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about thirty years old fell ill with pain in his thigh, and there were parts of the dough that were hard to the touch on the material of the chest that was pervaded by the thigh, and it was a matter of gout of great gout, and he did not have this cause externally.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then he extended the time because of the error of the doctors inside where the gout was located, and the matter of the wound was corrected, and his cure was paused inside where the hole was made, and there were some things in it that all got peeled off and the dryness and humidity of the skin.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then his cure lasted for many years, and he did not know that in the art, when you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the wound of him and the matter that came from him those things for great chest; and all the body of that man was completely healed and the color of him was citron.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then you introduced the dough to one of those wounds and it permeated the dough to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And if you have thoroughly examined all the wounds and found that they reach certain parts of the chamber, then...
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then you carefully covered the wound and inserted your hand over it, describing a part of the bone that was corrupted, already rotten and corrupted; and one part of the chamber had already become corrupted when it had penetrated into the flesh.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I understood that this was discovered and prepared by the bone discovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you thought that it was not in the bone but only that corruption which had been cut off and covered, and you had already fallen.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the plague with conservative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you continued to explore and discover about the bone secondly after the first discovery, and you found continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I understood that this was the cause of that corruption, and you had to perform proper cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	When you found another vein and did not stop inserting the small bones one by one particularly and perforating the restoration of it, and it was not restored until after inserting around a palm of yours, and that extracted from your bone marrow, and then restored that part with medications, and it became gradually consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to repeat the operation of the patient and sectioning of the patient unless for the disposition of the body and for the lack of tolerance of the patient and pain from the mort, four times in total due to excessive evacuation of bad sinus without any relief.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And it is cured by complete care, and there is nothing in place of hard bones; and it is good for the disposition of the patient in the body and return the virtue of the patient; and it is discussed in its dispositions and no harm is done in the ambulance or in any other cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bones are prominent in the body, you know that you have succeeded in this second method: and it is because you hold the thread and tighten it at the end of those bones, and command that it extends those in your hands; and pause that thread from the first thread; and lay that thread over the flesh that you leave the bones, and extend the extension of the thread so that the suture does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When you are ready to perform the operation, pause at the table of the teeth, for it is not forbidden to cut that which does not affect the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	If the bandage is placed over the affected area little by little, it should be in the concavity of the corrupted bone and not appear on its surface when touched with the other hand. And then it should be tightened.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are corrupted and not prominent, then continue to cut away one part after another, and the corruption spreads to its final location or to the next part; then discover the entire flesh of all parts; and finally pause there, and secure the first part where the corruption is found, while continuing to secure the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	If the securing is done according to the location of the corruption, as has been said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is in the joint, then cut into that corrupted joint and secure the bones where they continue from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If the corruption is in the continuation of several joints, you will not be in this reason but by force.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the neck of the arm or foot, it is very difficult; but you must ask which part appears to you as corrupt, and open that, and close it after each position that you can possibly close, and make it rectify itself for you, if not against your will, veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You should know that the types and sizes of the screws and holes for these bones depend on the situation of the bones, as well as the preparation of those bones, their thickness, size, and fineness, their rarity and size; so that you can prepare for all kinds of instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You know that this operation means on you about the special of the instrument that you asked for; when you have great study and long and careful hands of this art, and witness of hands of diseases, that already you have done these by your hands according to what is convenient for you from the parts of the stitch in all disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you know that at the end of this chapter, the number of the instruments that you will use according to their simplicity and those that you will process for your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large serra:
Forma de ray:	Form of ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray should be according to the form of the star-shaped lock, and its points should be according to the form of the iron points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not seem otherwise that they are cut through the heads of the joints when they are corroded, or is the mouth very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of larger razors of others:
Forma de razori menor:	The first source sentence "Forma de razori menor" translates to "Form of
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a smaller razor." However, without additional context, it's difficult to
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of a different type of pain: It is felt as an arch over the part where the edge of the blade touches and the sharpness of the blade, and the member of the body is affected." This sentence suggests that the pain is caused by the pressure of the blade on the body part, which is sharp and causes discomfort.
Forma de lu:	Form of you" or "Your form." However,
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of the razor in which it has concaved." This sentence suggests that the razor has a curved or bent shape.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another razor that is sharp." This sentence suggests that there is another razor that is shar
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved end." This sentence suggests that the razor has a curved edge or tip.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a razor that resembles a tent." This sentence is unclear without additional context. It could suggest that the razor has a shape
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of the incisors that are cutting the bones." This sentence suggests that the incisors are biting into or cutting through bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another type of incisor." This sentence suggests that there is another type of incisor with a different shape
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another type of incisor; it resembles a ray and has a sharp tip, and is displayed in various locations in the bones of the teeth." This sentence suggests that there is another type of incisor that has a rays-like shape and a sharp tip, and is found in different places in the teeth.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The first line of the text translates to: "The form of the bone that corresponds to the ratio of that which is perforated by bones:". This sentence seems to be discussing the relationship between the shape of a bone and the size or structure
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The second line translates to: "And its extremity is triangular and sharp-pointed." This sentence suggests that the bone's extremity has a triangular shape and a pointed tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	The third line translates to: "And it is made of Indian iron, and seems as if all the causes that have been said of razors and scissors and saws." This sentence appears to be comparing the quality or strength of the bone to that of various cutting tools.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The fourth line translates to: "Of the cutting edge and the cramp of the bones." This sentence seems to be discussing the sharpness or edges of the bone, as well
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The fifth line translates to: "Whether the extremities are caused by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the medicine does not cure it, or sometimes the corruption arises from a member that does not feel any cause, it seems that you have inserted this member into that place where the corruption has entered, so that the member may escape from there for death or malice that is greater than the defection of the member." This sentence appears to be discussing the causes of corruption or decay in the body, and how certain treatments or interventions may exacerbate the problem.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When the member that is affected is found, it is because it has become black inside because it is what has been burned, or if it can be properly placed inside the blackness that the puncture has made inside that member which then seizes the entire body and grasps everything; and therefore I have inscribed this.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And if it seems that the corruption is caused by a violent blow from some venomous causes, such as from a scorpion's sting or from something similar or from a nettle, and seems so.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the blow is at the end of the digit, you should inscribe the digit and do not give space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if it seems that you reach the hand, you should inscribe at that of the focus of the finger, and do not give space for the corruption to enter into the focus of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it happens that you avoid that, you should inscribe the arm inside the cavity at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if another corruption passes and sometimes the cavity is seen, you should in that case be the death of the member; and managing another cause another in curacy is the quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When the foot seems to have corruption of the same kind as the toe, you should insert it into one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you take hold of the heel of the foot, you should insert it entirely into the foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it may enter the hole, you should insert the cushion into the joint of the hole.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If the corruption has already spread over the heel, you should not engage it but release it and let the body die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The force of inserting the member or clamping it is that you stretch the tendon in the part where you want to insert it, and another tendon above it; and extend the minister one tendon to the parts further away, and extend another minister in its place; and you separate the flesh that is between two tendons, and cut it open from the inside if it is completely discovered; and then you insert or clamp it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And make sure that there is a pause of dry cloth on all parts so that it does not touch the place where it should be adjusted and postpone the cauterization.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If any bile accumulates when you operate, then you should cauterize the location immediately, or pause it with some powders that restrain the bile; and then return to your treatment once it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And tie the affected member with a convenient bandage, and care for it within the time it becomes healthy.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to go to a man in the country, this accident which you and I have reported, which occurred in the negro in the country due to an adjustment that was made for combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption first appears in the country when it is entirely applied to the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for his operation by applying pressure to the member with great speed due to the pain and adjustment of the foot, and he immediately entered the joint, and the foot became healthy.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago, this corruption occurred in the country's method of that indicated member.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I won, and so you perforated the reflection of that excess which was stopped over the face of the medicine, the mercifulness of the body; and it does not reflect the excess and begins to go to another place that began in the face.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	When the doctor inserted his hand into the patient's groin, and he did not intend to do so out of fear of the repercussion of that superfluousness, and rather than feared the incision of the patient's groin, which was overcome by weariness.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	I thought that he would die, returned to his land and found that the man I prepared and incised his abdomen, and was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have written this account not for entertainment but because it is an assistant over this matter and has significance for what is meant and followed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Treatment of the sinus and quality of clisterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in the fleshy parts of the body and the abscess is prolonged because it collects sana, and it bursts and perforates and extracts the sana, and the location is identified as if it were a well, and the code that is removed from there as soft as silk, and no corruption is found in the bone or nerve or limb, it is called sinus, and no fistula is formed.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	When, however, the space is extended within which corruption presses upon some member, it is called a fistula and is not closed.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure of the wound is that it is inserted into that channel as it rotates, and especially when it is finely sliced and made to resemble thread, and is comfortable so that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the channel adheres and that corruption is not achieved by subsequent consequences, and if there is much face in the channel, then you care for that with a clister.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And is it that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the breadth that you see is of bad odor, then you clister the medicament Egyptian which is of oil and vinegar and is received in parts equally, and are adjusted on the face within which the medicament is rolled out and penetrates into a specific part of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take hold of it as is necessary and dissolve the water and honey in it; and clister the medicament on that sinus, and stretch the incision, and place the medicine in it according to the number of hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	When it is necessary to extract that member, and it has been softened and the flesh has become thin; then do so for several days until it is fully relieved and the wound is completely healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	If some sores are covered with ash, and you are not able to present this medicine; and that is because you take the ash from the fire, and put water over it; and then close that and cover the sores within a short time after you know that this intestine has already been cut.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the thigh does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash of the fire, then close that wound with the water and mix honey with gum tragacanth, and close that wound with the honey mixture, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the sinu adheres to it, and especially when it has excessive dryness and thirst.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you make the wounds and you are sure that the intestine has become thin, then close that wound with the water and make it more tight so that the flesh is rejuvenated in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	It is necessary to take some oil of rose and dissolve the amulet in it; or to dilute the amulet with some medicines and apply other oils that have the properties I have already mentioned in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the orifice of the sinus is straight and not received by the catheter of the clister, you should gradually increase that amulet until it is wrapped in an Egyptian ointment or a basilicon ointment, as it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the orifice is wide, you should add the lips of the amulet to the seam and reduce the quantity inside the clister as much as possible.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifice of the sinus is elevated and causes the bowel to contract, you should dry that in a basin located in the area where the bowel comes out, so that the bowel can be returned to its original position before it is inflamed.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If you cannot dry the sinus within the bowel, you should perforate that member am prepared for the bowel according to which it is most difficult and that it is not held in any way by the bowel.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	When you have gathered consolidating remedies that are placed on the suitable part of the body for this, extend them over the cloth as desired.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be as large as the communication of the entire limb; and then insert an instrument at the right side of the orifice of the limb through a hole that is ample enough for the orifice of the limb; and then extend over other cloths of the same size as the number of holes, and place it over the one per long position of the orifice of the limb so that the expansion of the bowel of the patient does not retain the large dressing only for a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Whatever is over the orifice of the limb, which remains in place for the entire time that it is placed in the bowel.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to know whether the liquid coming from the bowel is much or little, or is digested or not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And then you consider the location of that limb, whether in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in its aposteme.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medical treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the material adheres to the sinu orifice already, or more firmly, then you hold the wound with your hand or finger, and when you remove the plague, you change the sheet and renew the dressing.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If the sinu has less space and subtle viruses under it, you do not despair of the adherence of it, because the medical treatment is appropriate, because in those who have a slower generation of flesh in these plagues, and in those who have the opposite of this.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinu has not been well digested for several days, you know that the sinu does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinu is delayed and is the cause of prolongation, you adjust the medicines in desiccation, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they become dry as the enguent finally, when it is added to the excess of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the more you dare to cure it, is because you take of the enguent finally and it dissolves in olive oil and is over the wounded part which has an antic engual in its substance, and conforms to that, and uses that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	When it seems to be in that way, when no brace is found, then look for a cushion, and use it if it fits well, or take a mirror and hold it up and dust it over the cushion, and place it on the fire and tighten that over the sinu; and place that am the cushion that you have found when it fits well, and dust it over drap and tighten that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some wounds are administered in the long-term care of the aristologia and are made with lili celesti (and lili celesti is) and flour and centaurea, and use those simple or adjusted, dust them and rub them over the cushion that I recommended, and close it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinu is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, you know that the corruption is in the preon of it, and you should make an investigation in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; you should treat it in a curacio fistular as it is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of panarici and worn nails and incision of the finger and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	When the pancreas is inflamed, which is felt on the inside of the thigh or foot, and it is not found in other parts, and when it is prolonged and the curacy is most precious, or it is inflamed by an apostema cautery, or it is corrupted, and it grows between the corroded end of the ungla and the whole, and it greatly corrupts the bone that is inside the toe that smells bad, and the tip of its corruption is at the end of the said lada, and its color becomes black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that which has been said in the division and does not satisfy your curacy, then you should know that you are completely insisted on the whole superfluity that is risen from the ungla and apply cauterization to the flesh at that place, for cauterization is not used in such a way.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bones are safe and the ungla is healthy, and the addicts of the ungla understand the carns at the parts that are cut, and they begin to push and ledeysso there, then you should know that you leave a subtle ray behind the angle of the ungla that punctured the flesh, and compress it inside and insert it into the flesh easily, and stop over there where the corrosive medicines of the bones are rising; and cure that which is enguentz over there where it is healthy.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	When corruption has already set in within the bones, you must cover them with the flesh of the affected part and its surroundings, as none can be healed if the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the pain and swelling appear in the affected area, then you should mark that spot with a needle according to the size of your memory, and carefully care for that part when it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is pain or swelling in the affected area and the pain becomes very intense, then you should cut the thigh at the beginning of the operation, and carefully dry the wound with a cloth soaked in hot water, and make sure that the wound does not enter the flesh that you have removed from the location; and carefully care for that place with a warm dressing.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	If the adjustment is not natural, which is common in many men, too much flesh is taken, and too much is left on the bones or too much is left on the thigh.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And the naturalness of the joint is determined by the shape of the joint, or is the origin of the joint in natural bones?
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	If that which is natural in natural bones is not bad, and the one that is natural in joints is too much.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	When it comes to those who are born lean, the incision is lighter, and if you are inserted into that part, you must do it with your own hand.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	For the one who is born in the joint's angle, the cure is difficult; and therefore, keep away from the abscess of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	For the one who is born in this place, you must have the nuts; cover that you are inserted at the beginning of the flesh of it, and then insert it with one of those convenient ones, and then cure it inside that which is healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Less consolidation that happens between those that are seen with the visible motions or by the nature of the man who is not yet born, or by the consolidation of plague or by combustion of fire, or by semblance, therefore, cover that success returns to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And pause between them the enfuses that are in the red olive per that they may not be consolidated lightly, and separate between those, or pause between those a thin layer of substance under that is consolidated after that cover.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	When it seems that consolidation has occurred in one part of the hand, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and fits the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	When there is a swelling (incision) of the limbs, it is called varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are a condition where the veins in the limbs are swollen and full of excessive melancholic fluid, which tends to occur more in the legs than in other parts of the body, especially in the legs of travelers and laborers and those who wear tight clothing.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	I advise that you administer purgation of the heart of dark-colored blood, some veins being expelled strongly, and the patient is bled from the basilar vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of their wounds is second: one is to make an incision and bleed the black sanctuary, and the other hand is to raise the vein and remove it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision of the vein is made according to this hand: first, cauterize the beginning of the vein with a strong burning tool, so that the black sanctuary is resolved, becoming feculent in the vein, and then strengthen the vein from the thigh to the end of the incision in a small or large section, and dry the black blood in three places, and raise it from the end of the incision through the thigh, and then apply it to the wound, when the black blood is sufficient and the number of times you want, and the wound will tolerate the virtue of the thigh.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	When you have found that part, and command him to abstain from black, corrupting drunkenness.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure with phlebotomy when the veins are filled and it is noted in the thigh.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Then the elevation of the thigh is followed by this method: you who raise the thigh, if it is not mottled with red, and place the hand on it and massage the thigh of the tail that envelops it and the veins are exuberant; or if it is exercised by strong exercise, and the hand is not at your present, then when the member is cold.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And cut the cord on the right side of the vein in sections along its length or at its base, or at the bottom of the vein you must remove it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And open the cord with scissors and remove the vein from the entire area where it appears in the feeling, and you must see the appearance of that which declines to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you cut and remove the cord, you see that white is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	When you have placed your hand on the elevated and swollen hip, hold it steady for a moment.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Cut another section of that section for three days, and scrape the skin from the area where the vein appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Raise that and insert it into the second section of the thumb, and remove that and raise it within the section that is above the first section, and remove that from the first section.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And place it within the area where you removed the pus from all sections, and insert it completely; and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If it does not comply with your orders to extract and raise, then insert a needle made of hard steel and turn it, and remove that and insert the hand and turn your thumb over the entire area where it is swollen.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And keep that from being inserted; if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that hand and it will come over the thigh for that reason.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that entire area is completely exposed, place your hand over the location of the hairless skin that is submerged in water and olive oil, and care for that entry where it is healthy.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein is obstructed due to tortuosity, which is wrapped around certain parts and not following a straight path as they have been told, then you should cover that area with your hand over the entire tortuosity of the vein and its surrounding areas, and suspend it in that way that raises it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And remember that you have not pierced the vein and do not pressure it in that way, as it may be difficult for you to raise it; and use your caution in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the incision made in the vein is:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of a mallet:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not an acute angle like the fingers or a sharp end because it does not press on the vein; and it has great flexibility, which if it were subtle, would pierce the vein with its subtlety; there are too many large sizes as they have been said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Removal of the thigh vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs of low lands as in the Ategi in Arabic lands and in the low, dry lands of India with little fertility and where there is no grass or bush.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	When the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate other parts of the body, it is called gout by doctors.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The treatment of the pain is caused by putrefaction, which appears as poison coming from the heart and snakes, spiders, and worms, engendering between the flesh and the bone.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The susceptibility of the occurrence of the pain is due to this vein that happens in the inflamed area, and the place is sutured; and another comes out from the location; and another starts the vein there, which seems to be like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the end appears, you cover that you involve over that one a piece of a ball, which is the foot of a dragon. Enter into it, and cut off that and let the ball hang down from the wound.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	As many times as you see that by the pain has any cause in the parts of the body, cover that with a ball and cut off that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, you cover that with a part of the body and wrap it around; and if not covered that which is outside, then if it is covered and entered into the flesh and adds apothem and poyredure in the place and ulceration bad.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	When the affected part is swollen and needs to be extracted little by little, it should be removed from the body cavity and not returned to the body without causing any further harm.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	This vein is found in many men who have a certain length of palm and thumb, and I have heard that one of them is about 20 palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is inserted at the time of medication, insert the ray into the abdomen through the incision and pierce that long incision into the body, then remove all that is in the material and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and cure that part with the care of bandages.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein has some ramps, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and goes to that orifice, and is located under certain orifices, and is found in many orifices.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And cure that part as has been said in the division and according to what has been said here.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section above, generated veins under the skin are called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine malady by those who have seen it in cattle, where the hooves are affected and the legs are thin, and it spreads throughout the body and causes pain in all parts of the member until the leg breaks and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of this is due to putrefaction of some humors that consist of worms, snakes, and insects, and parasites in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	When the patient is afraid of the malice of the doctor, it happens when he enters the body and reaches the head, and then goes to the chest, where he strongly pulls on the patient's breathing and enters and destroys the chest, and then makes uncomfortable movements.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Then when you want to cure that and extract it, you should not know if you have the ambulatory and appearance of the body in sensation, and then cover that which is over him and which is further away from him, and apply it with force on him and on the limbs that are constrained and tight, and then wet it over him and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is to be pierced in the flesh and not to be removed, then you should pause the cautery on the spot where it stays, and the main cause of fear is corruption of the part which corrupts the place as they have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that it has passed to the head of the chest, then apply pressure on the overlying part with strong constriction, and wet it over him, and extract that; and cover that this body uses for the corrosion of the healthy chest by the use of medicines evacuating putrid humors, and keep away from those generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is common in our land, and it causes pain in various parts of the body, and it spreads from one part to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	When you have already seen that which you are now recommending to me.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to attend a woman with a foot problem in a village, and I discovered that her arm had an inflammation of a small vein in the funis, and after an hour, I saw that inflammation disappear as if silver were being poured into this, but I did not notice that it was because of the location of the vein in the location.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then, the pain subsided in that place and remained in the muscle, and it stayed like this for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then, the other arm was corrected to pass through the other knee.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I recommend to you that you turn your body so that you see the other side; and it is too wonderful to change the position of the limb and the speed of the member to the member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	When you have already seen that in the best hands, following that hand, but you have seen how those who are suffering from pain want to change the position of the member to the member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I did not see that in the hands as it was in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	When I first realized that it was not something else but gout, because the woman was young, with a slender body and visible veins, and in this case, the sensation of pain was like a prickling feeling.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that this treatment not be apparent in those who are delicate and have humors that are not clotted with veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you want the treatment of the patient and they feel that pain, do not appear to you as if it has been done as they have told you, then strengthen that and afterwards remove it and press on that part inside where it is that feels that prickling sensation, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not see the wounds on the thighs, then you treat that as an exception to the heart and its expulsion of prickling sensations, and remove those unpleasant pills and serpent's gall and similar ones.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of sage.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sage is diverse according to the species and locations on the body where it is picked, for those that have large points, petite, concave, and narrow ones, and solid ones; and of those that have three angles, and of those with tongues; and of those with stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	When the second member or limb is affected, two main causes are considered: the brain, heart, lungs, and intestines. When you notice that one of these organs is causing the pain, it is recommended to avoid extraction in that organ if it is not possible to save the patient's life. If you cannot find the cause of the pain, and the organ is not deep within the body, then extract it and treat the abscess.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the symptoms of the serum are noticed in the organ, and the bones pass through it, and the cyphal is over the brain, which is affected by severe headaches, scotomia, vertigo, and loss of consciousness, as well as inflammation and spasm of the tongue, and paralysis and permixtio of understanding, vomiting of choler, and great bleeding of the lips, and the word is cut off and destroyed by the voice, and the location of the moist wound resembles polls, and there is a sign of the appearance of the flesh at the sight of the carn.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	If you find these symptoms in your patients, then avoid surgery and extraction of the gallbladder, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the gallbladder is swollen in the abdomen, it is likely that it is located on the left side of the pelvis, and there are no signs of inflammation; and the movement of the gallbladder resembles the movement of the finger, and a dark color of the plasma appears, and coldness in the extremities, and sweating, and spasms; and therefore you know that death is near.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	If the gallbladder has caused inflammation of the lung and excessive sputum from the lung, and the vessels that are closest to the colon are affected, and the color of the thigh changes, and the spirit is expelled in great amounts, and there is a strong desire for air cold.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the gallbladder is in the membrane that is in the chest, and the pain occurs in the small costal bones, and a great amount of violent pain and spasms are felt, and not all the muscles are affected, then...
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If you suspect that the cat has swallowed something, it is best to consult a veterinarian immediately, as some ingested objects may cause serious harm to the cat's digestive system.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If you suspect that the cat has swallowed something in its stomach and it is stuck, or if there is any sign of plague, intestinal tissue, or hernia, and there is no hope for the recovery of the cat's extraction, it is best to consult a veterinarian immediately.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If you suspect that the cat has swallowed something in its bladder and it is passing urine with feces, and there are any signs of disease in the parts affected by the feces, and there is severe pain in the thighs, you should immediately consult a veterinarian, as this may be a fatal condition.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other parts of the body are similar to those of the face, neck, and shoulders, as well as the spine, vertebrae, and joints, and they are saved when the cat does not have a vein or artery blocked and is not bitten by a venomous animal.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend that you have seen the appearance of these cats, so that you can understand what to do for their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is, for in a man there was a cessation of the flow of tears from the eye in the corner of the nose, and you extracted that out of another part, then the gray of the eyebrow, and it was healed, and did not become infected in the corner of the nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And you extracted another cessation from the eye that was stopped in the corner of the eyelid, then the eyelid was left with the eye, and the cessation had already been hidden and not seen from that, but it was a great cessation among the sharp sagetas of the Turks, which had a leon in the which there were no eyebrows.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the eye was healed, and it did not become infected in the corner of the eyelid.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And you extracted another cessation from the eye that was stopped in the corner of the cheek, and it was an Arabic sageta, and it was that which had the eyebrows; and then you inserted it under the guidegi, and it was already submerged in the cheek; and then you subtilized it over it, and extracted it, and it was healed for the Crestia.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	When another wise woman was asked by a man who was lying on his stomach, and thought he would not live much longer; and therefore, after forty days had passed and no change had occurred in his condition, she went over the patient and examined him closely, and he was cured, and the accident did not recur.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I saw a man who had a woman castrate him on his buttocks, and the plague was consolidated over it, and after five years, the wise woman was in the position of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman who had a man castrated in the abdomen, and the plague was consolidated around it, and it did not change in her condition, and the woman did not become barren in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man who had a woman castrate him on his face, and the plague was consolidated around it, and the wise woman was not pregnant with pain, and she seemed to be in good health.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	I extracted the woman from the man of the first king who had been castrated in the middle of his thigh and had already passed away at the end of the day a small one, and the entire woman was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	When you were called to attend to the patient's case, it took three days for the swelling of the leg to subside.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then you examined the swelling of the leg carefully; then you inquired about that which was hidden, and did not feel it; but later you felt that the tip of the needle was on the ankle joint, and then you wondered if that was at the end of the leg.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Then you examined the place where it was most painful and attractive and digestive, confident that this is the location of the leg, because it appears to me that this is the location of the swelling.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Then you did not find any significant accident in the location that you had caused the swelling; and you continued to examine it over the days without finding an accident, and the swelling gradually subsided, and the leg of the knee joint was relaxed for several days after I felt the swelling with my hand.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then you stopped using the acute corrosive medicine for several days after it burned, and you touched it with your hand, and I examined that, and I found the tip of the leg subtle, which adhered to the fist.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	When you have adjusted the patient's position in the abscess for that acute medicine, after I clearly saw the tip of the finger, and it took me about four months to pass the time.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	When you saw the abscess was swollen, and could easily insert the forceps into it, and leave it there, and not allow it to become inflamed, then you did not cease to subtly and ingeniously manipulate that maneuver of the engine over that am manieyras of engens, after which I found the form of those in the neck of the capillary, and then extracted it; and then restored that abscess.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And if the doctors found that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and you restored it and the abscess was consolidated, and the wound healed for the entire well-being of the patient, and did not return to it in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some abscesses because it pauses this rule and has significance about this that I have not said, four parts of this article and the definitions of that are not understood in the narration nor do I understand those free.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The artificer wise compares little about many things; and I think that it is present what is absent; and the novel operation and the novel instrument need the descent of the causes outside the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	When you say that knots are not outside the members in which they are tied, either by attraction to the place where it is wound, or by the opposite part, it means:
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When that which is entered through the location where it is inserted, or is proceeding from the flesh, and is pulled out and re-inserted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not obey the time required for the catheter, it is likely that you will lay it for several days until the flesh surrounding the part becomes dry and the attraction of the part and its exit are relieved.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it remains in the bone and does not obey your time for insertion, you will have to lay it for several days and wait for the attraction and moisture to occur on each day, and it has been re-inserted.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey the time required for the catheter, it is likely that you will have to perforate in the circuit of the suture on that part of the total journey until that location is amplified by the suture, and extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the suture is in the skull and has already passed through one of the cavities of the brain, and appears in the thighs of those accidents which you have told me, you should not remove the suture and lay it back inside that it may be equal to the required time; if the suture pierces the cipher, the death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the gout does not occur only in the body of the bone but also passes through the cipherac, and remains in the hernia for several days without any accidents occurring to it from those causes, then you should engage in the treatment of the gout and the hernia.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If the gout is stuck and does not obey your extraction, then you should administer remedies in the circuit of the gout according to what has been recommended, and properly care for the place that has become healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the gout is already aggravated in the location of the body and is aggravated by the sentiment, then you should investigate that am, and if you feel it, then shoot that am with the sturmentz that are convenient for the treatment of the hernia.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constraint of the plague and its length, and there are no nerves or veins here, then you should apply to the plague when it is amplified and it is possible to extract the gout.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held in the arteries that are sick, then you should cut the flesh in which it is stuck, and treat over that, if you cannot treat the escape of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in torssio of those that obey.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you are performing the removal of the tumor in any location where it is, use your own twist of the forceps at all parts that pass through that which causes the obesity and that it be flat and that it be a true reflection of your difficult attraction to it and to that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot do that in that time, then you must stay there for a few days until the parts that are in the circuit of your body have dried out, and then proceed with that which you were unable to do.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you have any objections to this treatment, I will administer the remedy that has been prescribed in the capital for this condition.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue from the obstruction of veins, nerves, or tendons, and administer an ointment as best you can to prevent the sweat; and make it easy, calm, slow, and firm like what has been recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then make the patient sweat according to what is appropriate for the condition of the thigh, so that the sweat comes out in that area, which is less painful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not possible for you, I will administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	The sweats that are caused by the opposite direction of the other part, or that have been treated in any part of the parts, or cause gilbositat (an unknown term) of the sweat due to the feeling of the part pushed out of the cord, and then you press on that; and that section is according to the quantity in which they grasp with the forceps; and then attract it, so that it becomes less eyssiment (another unknown term).
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If the pain is held in the bone, then you should cut the leg with the opposite hand entering the bone, and expand it as much as possible, and then remove it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Otherwise, keep that for a few days, and repeat it as needed.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the edge of the hammer is in that position, then press on it with that.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the edge is broken and needs to be administered with force, then insert it and that, if it is too tight, stretch it by placing your hand on the concavity of the bone and pressing on that edge with force.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the bone is concave, then press on that edge with force while inserting it, and the bone will be held in place by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the bone is intoxicated, then cover that part of the flesh where the verse is, as much as possible, and treat it with care, as appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the bone is in the chest, or in the stomach, or in the vesica, or in the side, and it is near where you touch that part of the verse, and it is possible to do so without harming it, then wash that area and keep an eye on the veins or nerves, and remove it, and place it back if needed, and care for it after it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The first line of the text is a medical term that refers to the shape or form of forceps used for gripping or holding something. In this context, it is likely referring to
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	These lines seem to be discussing the shape or form of the forceps, which are designed to hold onto something without causing harm or damaging it. The "extremitatz" likely refers to the ends or tips of the forceps, which are sharp enough to grip but not so sharp as to cause injury. The "cum serra" could be a metaphor for being firm or secure in one's gr
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	These lines appear to be discussing the different types of grip that can be achieved with forceps, depending on the size and shape of the object being grasped, as well as the strength of the grip. The "motas specias" could refer to specific techniques or methods for holding onto an object, while the "grans" and "paucas" likely refer to the width or thickness of the forceps. The "migieras" could be a reference to the precision or accuracy of the grip.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	This line seems to be discussing the way in which the forceps are used to apply pressure or force to the object being grasped. The "impellent concau" could refer to the act of pushing or forcing something, while the "ayssi" might refer to the direction or angle of the force. The "pena de ausel" could be a reference to the pain or discomfort that may be experienced when using forceps, while the "intrament de la sageta en lu" might refer to the way in which the forceps are inserted into the
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	This line seems to be discussing the shape of a sharp-pointed tool used for impelling or forcing something through a narrow opening. A possible translation
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	This line appears to be discussing the process of inserting an instrument into a concave cavity and forcing something through it. A possible translation: "Then, as if the intestine were being inserted into a concave cavity and forced through it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	This line seems to be discussing a type of surgical procedure related to veins. A possible translation: "Of ven
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	This line appears to be discussing various types of veins that are commonly targeted for surgical procedures, including those located in the neck, face, and mouth. A possible translation: "Of the veins that are commonly targeted for fleubotomy, which include those located in the neck (such as the external carotid artery), the two temporal arteries, and the two lacrimal veins; the vena prepared in the lower part of the front, and the vena that is at the extremity of the nose; the guided veins located in the chin; the veins located in the labial floor; the veins located in the labial roof; and — these are the veins that are commonly referred to as angular veins; and those that are located at the end of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that have been severed in the thighs are considered, four of them are called crural veins; one is the "vein of the head", also known as the "wolf vein", and is composed of a ramus from the basilica vein and another ramus from the crural vein. It is called the "vein of the whole body" when it is paused in the domestic basilica vein, known as the "ciliar", and is named "venter" by the vulgars for the "venter" vein, which is paused over the focus, and is the one that undergoes flebotomy and appears above the ankle for manifest appearance; and salvage, which is the vein that passes between the ear and the little finger, and is found in two ramuses.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and leg, there are three veins; one of those is where the curvature of the wild lark's leg is left; the second is the saphenous vein, its location is where the domestic lark's leg is left; the sciatic vein, its location is where the wild lark's leg is left; and in the camber, there are other veins resembling those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I will try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into English:
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of smearing those is what you recommend to me: it should be thin at the top of the thigh, and thick at the top of the thigh in the occipital region in the area of the veins that are not too wide or good for friction; then stretch the thigh with your hand inside where the knuckles and joints appear, and place your fingers on the two nodules at the base of the head; and what you said, and if you feel the tips of those with the same pressure, here it is.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Do you hold the scalpel, and that is where it hits, and do you introduce that vein into the socket after it has been cut open to meet the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand, and hold the vein and the socket at their parts, and insert the vein where you have just incised it.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And is the length of the incision the quantity of two adjustments or around that; and do as much as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then stretch the powders and place them inside after it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And after
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Many of the arteries are venous and serve as the source of energy for the flebotomy procedure, which is an ancient and malicious practice that often leads to excessive bleeding and painful wounds. And after
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of flebotomy is second only to what I recommend to you: tighten the thigh until you feel the veins coming out, and then hold them with your hands. And do not let go until you see the desired result.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if you raise the catheter over the vein at the desired points, and insert the flebotomy needle into the indicated position, and then lift the vein on its own; and inject the solution according to the amount of your requirement.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And after the cauterization of the thigh, and rest on the desired position over the vein for an hour, and then rest on that cloth and pulsate and tighten the part that is under strong constraint, and lay it outside when it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so, the initial step in venous thrombosis of the front is similar to the venous thrombosis of the cephalic vein in the ancient diseases of the face, including emigranes and rogors, as well as ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the cephalic vein thrombosis is second only to what you recommend to me; therefore, it strains the desire for one bend that appears within which the vessel is located; and then hold the instrument that is named by the physician as the one with this form of the vein:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point on the prominent part of the fossa over that vein and prick it with your finger or another cause in your hand, and leave the scar running according to the quantity you want; and then desist from the incision and strain that enters when it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some thromboses are opened during cephalic vein thrombosis, but it is not clear whether the thrombosis is of acute extremity as with other thromboses, rather it is of the opposite extremity, and the cephalic thrombosis is second to the transverse one, where the os is propelled and fort the threader cuts into the fossa when it subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	When the health of the two veins that are the tear ducts of two nipples for scar tissue and seborrheic dermatitis in the nipples, and for the wounds of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the incision is that it tightens the collar and makes it look like a needle, and you should stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And if the incision is made according to the transverse and longitudinal plane of a few fleabites, where there is no flesh; and if the incisions are small, then the extremity of the ear is cut off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And if it is necessary to run the scent as much as you can, and stand over those holes, and tighten them with a needle, and then remove them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	When the incisions of the vein of the nose are similar to acute fever and high-velocity saliva, and for the wounds of the face, eyes, and scabies that occur in the face, and especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the incision of the patient is that it tightens the collar and holds the nose with your left hand, and takes the incisions small and places them under the nose in the right location of the head of the nose according to the straight line, where the vein does not appear in the sensation here, and where the scent begins to flow so much.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	The first line of the source sentence is: "Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat;
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the advantage of the female castration guide you to the constraint of the male and the beginning of leprosy, as well as the maladies of the poor and the uncured and the corrosive ulcerations, just as in epilepsy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the flebotomy of those is that the patient stretches out each leg separately; and the artificer should be over the head of the patient, and the patient should be lying on his side.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And the flebotomy of the vein is that it is cut long, but not too much at a time; and some parts are removed later, according to the need that arises, and it seems like another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And the patient should be made to lie down and tighten the veins as much as possible, without causing the patient to faint, and then enter the mattress where the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The advantage of the flebotomy of the veins is that it removes small blisters and pustules from the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and the bad ulcers in the nose and inside the circuit.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the flebotomy of those is that it relieves the patient from suffering, tightens the thigh of the patient with a wedge, and turns the lips of the patient and looks at the other veins of which one is on the left side of the lip and the other on the right; and the demonstration of each is by the nail of each toe, and it is less in the circuit of those thin black veins; and then insert each in its place.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you doubt further, and do not know which of these is the most important, then understand the majority of these, and the clear manifestation of that one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And give the appearance of veins that are in the lips of those.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to insert more blood vessels into the lips than into the lip of the patient.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	More blood vessels are found in the tongue than in the lip of the patient, with the flebotomy of the head at the forehead, in the uvula, and in the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of flebotomizing those is that it follows the lip between the patient's teeth and raises the tongue, and looks at the tongue from one vein and another vein, and the color of each is darker.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And continue to flebotomize each one; and keep in mind that you do not cut the veins, but leave them behind when flebotomizing those, as they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are flebotomized in the thigh are in those that are usually found in all men, and the flebotomy of those is made with two hands, or use lemons or olives for subtlety; or use a flebotomy knife, and ask if it is necessary, and this is the form of the tongue:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This anatomy is that which can be sliced and those specific parts of the body, according to their width of the veins and the stricture of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of flesh cutting:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Is the width of the thigh like that of the veins, and it is necessary to open the concave full veins that appear to be large, and those that contain the thick gout.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of flesh cutting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flesh cutting is of smaller width and with a gentle extremity, and it is necessary for the fleshing of small veins that contain the gentle citron.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the advantage of the fleshing of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: take out the gall from the stomach and the intestines, and that which lies in the chest and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the flesher, when fleshing that, to guard and be careful not to harm it, and if he does, there will be an artery, and if he punctures it wrongly in the fleshing point, he may cut that artery and cause a flow of gout, so that he should not flesh that without fleshing pungent, as the anatomy says.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear in a manifest way, you should believe that you are seeing it and that you are moving to the other side, or that you are surrounding some ram there; or that you are making incisions in the location of the end of the arm, where that is manifest; and that you cut it as they have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want the incision of the elbow, you should cut through the stricture of the arm that touches the location inside where the location of the fingers is, and place it over the arm as you think; and then cut the brace and the vein that is cut in a concave way by fleubotomy as they have said; and keep in mind that you should avoid the percussion in the space of the artery's location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see that the limb is stretched, inflammation occurs in the location that you have seen as you think; and that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, so it twists.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see that the blood flows in the incision as wax from a child's nose, and it is a subtle rog, you should know that it is of the artery's blood; and you should cut and pause the thing said about that for a long space; and then remove the thing said, and if the blood is abscised, several veins are abscised, then stretch the arm and let go of that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	You should guard the patient's leg from the cold, and place it above their heart to prevent it from getting cold for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the wound does not heal, and sometimes you are not present to treat it with medicine, you should incise the artery if you see that; or take a previous stick of fist, and press it on that, and hold it there until it stops bleeding at the location of the vein that is in stricture, and the pulvis for another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the wound heals, then it is; and if not, you should care for that which was preceded by the remembrance of the location of the powders that flow from the wound.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the healing of the wound is difficult in the positions that are disposed for the small part of the plague and the possibility of the vein of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Perhaps the removal of the dark vein is the best way to extract the wound from the subincision of the head and to the end of the chest; therefore, which is composed of the ram of the basilica and the ram of the cephalica, as they have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	When the anesthetist covers the area over the fear in the anesthesia of the patient, it is a nerve; and then if they adjust to the puncture of the anesthesia and paralyze the nerve, it will cause the patient's stupor, and it is difficult to treat the patient, and for the patient who is not cured completely, this nerve that is seen as a sensation appears; and if it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not shown, you cover the anesthesia with your hand at the place where you perform the anesthesia and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you should find the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of the anesthesia of thecephalic vein is that it relieves the pain of the head and alleviates the maladies of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And if you want the anesthetist to puncture in this very place, that is, whether they puncture the cephalic vein or the facial vein; then all the veins are saved, and neither the artery nor the nerves are left outside.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is important for you to perform the flebotomy that you have learned, as the flebotomy does not push the lance cap so far into the leg, and surrounds the location with a pus-like substance, and does not notice it if it is not affected by the first percussion over the same area of the flebotomy some visible signs.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is very important for you to be careful with other patients, as if you do not perform the flebotomy in the first percussion, you will not notice that apostemat in that patient.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the flebotomy of that one and the accidents that happen to it, in which you should think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of them is that you know that flebotomy is not administered unless it is in conservation of health and for the hope of the patient and caution of the possibility of diseases, and that a correct flebotomy in one of the veins that are in the thigh is: cephalica, black, and basilica; and that a correct flebotomy at the beginning of the first day, after dinner, and in the autumn, and in winter when significant signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its c
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When joint pain is treated, when it is convenient and necessary to do so, or not, at any time of the day or night, in total hours and minutes.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	This source sentence translates to: "However, if the womb is not dilated before twelve years of age, and the female does not undergo a procedure until the fourth month within the seventh year, and the walls are not dilated which have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	This source sentence translates to: "And when it is necessary for any woman to be dilated, it is recommended that the uterine folds be left uncut, if they have been held by a catheter, so that the veins do not excrete superfluous substances in the dilation of the uterus, which are pure and do not affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	This source sentence translates to: "And if the women are not dilated with the natural discharge of mucus and excretion, nor escaping from malnutrition or ebriety within which they remain after it, nor malady of dyspepsia, and moreover that dilatation is troubled by colic pain and vomiting, and coitus, and exercise of labor or watchfulness or total causa which dissolves the virtue, or is corporeal28 or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And if you consider in subtlety of humors that is causing this pain, whether it is cold, wet, and heavy, or if there are any medications that can be given to relieve this pain as much as possible.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if you enter into baths, whether any cause does not prohibit it, or if it is exercised by some exercise for that this pain becomes subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the fleebotomy on the chest, as it is time for third-course dinner, as they have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And tell me what pain this chest has suffered on that day of all animal accidents, as you have said, how much anguish, rage, fear, and of all corporal accidents, how much labor and superfluous pain and weight and resemblance to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at its close, the causes should be present in the use of the one that people usually use for pain, which is aromatic and odorous and has balsams and resemblances to those that follow in the same degree of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the fleebotomist on a cushion that is placed either on that which will be fleebotomized or on the one that has been fleebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	When extracting the arm, and sharpen that on its own with three cuts; and then tighten the ligature around that sharp edge.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	If the stricture is tightened, whether it is tightened to the extent that it does not close, or if it is too loose, then forbid the flow of blood; or if it is softened, and forbid the body's heat.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	When the stricture is tightened, make sure that the one who performs the flebotomy sharpens his tools between them, entering through which veins are inflamed, and they are declared by feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	When the flebotomy tool is sharpened on the patient's arm with a small amount of ancient oil; and then place the finger on the opposite side of the vein, at that location where you want to perform the flebotomy, so that the vein leaks a little, and the percussion is set as far away from the vein as possible, so that the vein does not burst when performing the flebotomy, and those that are full of gas and when you stop the flebotomy on that side, you must remove the flebotomy tool; and the flebotomy does not cut the vein, and if it does, that one is tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, in order that this flesh-eating knife may be stopped and be troubled in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	When you have paused the dissection, if the vein is hard in one place and then softens in another, then do so; otherwise, continue to another vein in that location or over the intestine, if the location does not become inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location becomes inflamed or the thigh is swollen, then you should massage it for a day or two, and do not strain the limb, as much as possible, to avoid relapsing into inflammation, nor should you enter into baths.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And continue the dissection if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and bleeds slowly and you fear that it may not reach the desired amount, then continue the dissection in that direction with another cut, and make sure that the incision does not become inflamed, as in case of inflammation in many women, you need less incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if the location becomes inflamed again, do not continue on it, as there is no cause for you to avoid it; and pause over that part of the blade of the needle, where the corset of the wound is, to relieve the pain of the wound.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	This place is better than oil and the others.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Apparently, oil is used in all types of incisions during which veins are cut, and then typhoid fever or tetanus is caused when one of them is placed over the area, causing the sanc to sublimate and roll up when it becomes large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If in the location of the incision a large abscess is generated, where watched veins accumulate, and particularly to that which has not been bled except that vein, or in the inflammation of the small vein, and you close it, and place your hand over the area, sponge infused in water and salt, a little scrubbed, and stretched for an hour, where it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And if this is the case, then apply properly the dressing to the sanc of that vein, either in the complement of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If Roman is in the location for any days any black or green, you don't notice it; and if you want, place your hand over that cause of aloen and dissolvut, or any cause of sweat or wool or like that of Lu.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	This sentence appears to be discussing the occurrence of certain movements (motas) that require the intervention of a surgeon (apostemas e eminencias). The term "fleubotomia" is not a standard medical term, but it seems to be related to a procedure involving the bas
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	This sentence suggests that one should pause their work and place their hand over the affected area, and if there is any pain or discomfort, it is due to the evil influence of the eminence. The text advises to continue working with caution, as there may be issues with the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	This sentence suggests that if the area is inflamed, it should be treated with a stiptic agent to make the area endure, and further care should be given to the affected part after it has been made healthy.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	This sentence appears to be discussing the relationship between the health of a person and the amount and quality of their sweat, as well as the color of their sweat, which can indicate their health status. The text suggests that the quantity and quality of sweat can vary depending on the individual's level of vigor and the appearance of the sweat.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	This sentence suggests that if the sweat is black, one should apply a remedy immediately upon noticing it, and if the sweat is thick, a different remedy should be applied. The text also suggests that if the sweat is watery, one should avoid applying any remedies until the acuity of the sweat has been determined.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	When the vein is stretched and the flebotomy is amplified, and the flebotomy is large, it is necessary to extract blood in a vein.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if the vein is small, then make the opposite point, and extract it in multiple veins, and the track should be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The better way to administer in flebotomy of vein is that it should be the transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of flebotomy is saved from the flow of blood and the injury of nerves, and it is praised and saved as a successful flebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And if it is customary to have spontaneous bleeding after flebotomy, and you cure that denant the flebotomy with a small amount of infusion in a milliliter or a simple oximel scalfat; and extract the blood from the vein in three or four veins.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is excessive bleeding, then you should take infusion from the flebotomy with a milliliter or a simple oximel scalfat in an ear drop of mirrors or an ear drop of aromatized honey as it has pebre, canela, ginger and similar scents, or an aromatized and odorant one.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If hernias occur, and it causes the patient's discomfort, then you should perform fleebotomy, and take an amount of warm animal water, along with some fragrant odoriferous substance; and use aromaticity from one of them, and place it near the patient's chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes that have been mentioned in the division of the capital of hernias for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if the patient's arm swells and dissolves the hernia secondarily observed, use that of which the fleebotomy is for evacuation, and its virtue frees, which removes the hernia little by little, so it is according to the amount of the virtue in the following days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	More often the patient's arm swells and dissolves the hernia secondarily observed, and the patient's chest becomes strong, then you should perform the operation in about seven hours or nine days after the first fleebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	More often the hernia of the chest is pulled towards the opposite side of the part where it was previously attached, and it should be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When the body is in which the wound is already sawn and sharp, and causes fever, because it is the wound of the sick person in one cut and is largely cut and amplified, the perception within what happens without sinus is pushed; and you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you must place your hand over the knees of the patient's body, because it does not die in place of sinus, four slices are made when the flebotomizer is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you want to slide the arm and evacuate the second puncture, as the wound of the vein is already closed and the pain is quite difficult for the patient, you should press with great force and bend your hand slightly, as it is too painful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	If the cut is second-degree; or if you are afraid of the sharpness of the cut that coagulates in the vein; or if you pause over that with tyranny, or with sadness, and compresses a little the wound that is outside and out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is gangrenous, you must open it and do not touch inside that gangrene, which is sedative.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if you need to make you evacuate the second puncture immediately and not excuse yourself, you should mark that over that place or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "thigh funnel" is cut in place of the black or the basilica, when it is not inflamed or swollen, and it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the incision in the foot is that it introduces its hand into the watery tail enters that the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	When you place your hand on the affected area with the tightened ligament, and then make a small incision parallel to the transverse petal, neither horizontally nor along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Is the incision wide and is your fleubotomy the one you made on the joint of the other leg?
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the salve is prohibited, then you iterate the leg in the water puddle and let the salve run in the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you would excuse the iteration of the leg in the water puddle and the heart of the salve in water for a while during the rain.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the fleubotomy of this vein is placed saved that of all the other veins, four out of five do not have a pulse, nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the fleubotomy of the gallbladder duct is compared to the diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the fleubotomy of the other leg is that you tighten the ligament or the other, placed because you have it in the water puddle, when the vein is inflamed and is demonstrated at the same time; and the incision is parallel; and if not cut in all no will be able to reach it in re.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	When preserving the joints and not finally closing them, it is customary to leave the foot bare, as the doctor will see the bones of the disrobed toes.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then, immerse the foot in cold water and let it run over the wound, as if you do not immerse the foot in cold water, the blood will coagulate at the vein's end, and it is forbidden to bleed.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When extracting the blood according to the amount of need, you should place your hand over the vein or sea, so as not to solidify it completely; and it seems that you will do this in all cases straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The advantage of the joint examination of that of the other thigh is that it is consistent with the diseases of the table.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And seemingly in the joint examination of this foot as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the vein section in the joint examination is that it is consistent with the diseases of the part opposite the foot, such as the diseases of the other parts, and with retention of menstruation, and ulcers of the thighs and old changes, and with their appearance.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the fleubotomy of the patient is that it enters the limb through the leg and covers the area where there are veins; it also makes points on the joint of the foot; and the location of the vein is apparent at the tip, and from there it follows the path that branches into the face of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	When it comes to making a cut into the abdomen or wherever the addition of the needle is needed, it is better and you need to add some salt.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you are making a cut on the sole of the foot, pay attention to the nerves that are still present there, and pause your incision at the point where you want to insert it, as if you were inserting it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the cuts be well.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If the injection of the salve is prohibited, then you should irrigate the foot in the running water and let the salve run through that which has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cutting tool goes wrong in the first attempt, you should irrigate the wound with a little water, at the place where the salt is; and do not fear the malicious one, rather that you protect yourself from the nerves as they have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And it seems to be a sign of another foot's engulfment.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And the location of the sciatic vein is as they have said, you need to leave the tail of the hand in the wild part of the cavity.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	When the operation of the knee is for pain in the ankle, it is done by cauterization.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the knee operation is that it enters into the bag, and quickly and firmly tightens the thigh muscle of the wide part within four to five fingers of a long, thin needle, which does not appear except for this reason.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, you should operate on the second leg that is closest to you and the opposite side, and it is better; or if it is incised, it is cut, and the location of the knee is left open.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And in most men it is not affected; and if you cut it, and it does not appear at the moment, you should operate on one of the thighs, and that which appears in the two feet is the one that is heard and worn out.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And keep an eye on the nerves, and run the cauterization as much as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then loosen the stricture and hold over the location of the knee cut, where the wound heals.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	This line seems to be discussing the causes of pain or discomfort, possibly referring to certain weather conditions (ventozacio) and the nature of the affliction (qualitatz
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	This line suggests that joint pain can be caused by various factors such as corns, warts, or other irritations.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	This line indicates that joint pain can be exacerbated by certain activities or conditions, such as scraping or excising warts, and also by exposure to cold weather.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This line suggests that the pain caused by scraping or excising warts can be alleviated by applying warm or cold compresses to the affected area.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	This line provides a detailed list of locations on the body where joint pain can be alleviated by scraping or excising warts, including the armpits, groin, chin, jaw, mandible, lips, ears, nose, cheeks, neck, shoulders, and various other parts of the body.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	This line suggests that joint pain is not caused by the removal of sinew or tendons, but rather by the removal of small blood vessels in the flesh, and that this can cause further discomfort similar to that caused by a botch. It also notes that joint pain is not necessarily alleviated by applying warm or cold compresses to the affected area if the entire body has been evacuated of waste.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If labor pains are caused by a difficult childbirth or continue for a long time, it is necessary to administer medicine at the beginning of every month and throughout the entire pregnancy, and in the woman's private parts and at any other time it may be needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is in men who, when they are called upon to perform extractions by midwifery and fail to do so with severity and vigor, suffer from weakness and trembling in their face and neck, and in their collarbone; and from weakness and trembling in the face and front of their head, and loss of color and heaviness and slowness in their limbs; and from the location of their childbirth; and from the increase of their labor pains; and from the increase of their hunger; and from the loss of taste in their mouth, or from the tongue being postponed and saliva flowing from it; and from their sleep becoming more frequent, and from pain and restlessness and other ailments that affect their appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when any of those causes are present, and especially if it is in the middle or end of the month, then you should command that midwifery be performed as soon as possible, no later than two or three hours after the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	When the windpipe of the neck is affected by gravity, it falls into the head and pushes down on the shoulders; this can be due to an improper evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This windpipe is in the location of craniotomy for the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not necessary to use that which is of complex nature or in the quality of catarrh, as it can cause great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	Therefore, it is not necessary to use those vile parts, and in the heads of those who are poorly shaped.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	What is more, if one continues to stay over it, they will lose all memory; and therefore, it is necessary that you command the windbag to pause its suction slightly on the parts left, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Less windpipe of alchemical wind is in the location of craniotomy for the dark vein and the basilica: and therefore, it causes asthma, and constraint of the air and the scissure of the storm of the air, and tos, and replecio.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When the wind is colder than usual, a small amount of it can cause weakness in the heart and stomach if left unattended.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The wind of the cold air can cause accidental pain in the head and throat, eyes, and face, as well as toothache, and it is in the location of scalp incision of the brow ridge.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the windcaller to not press on their own hand, but instead to scrape, so that the artery does not get hurt and does not cause blood to flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The wind of the cold air can cause alcohol to be left in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and appearance like that of diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in the location of scalp incision of the upper lip.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the wind that is made on the upper lip with spatula causes calidity to be absorbed by the cafathan, which is made for replenishment of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the wind of the upper lip that divides the fingers of the fire causes vitality to the scalp incision of three veins, which is of the brow ridge, black and cephalic, where that atracts the artery of all those veins pushed by the flesh, and those veins that are pushed by other veins that are fat.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When ordering the surgeon not to perform too much incision, let the location be stripped of flesh, and then remove the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	A wind is one that is used to ventilate the cavities of the thighs and to apply ointments to the ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And command that the wind be large and that it be of earth, and that it demands a deep cut; and then use subtle winds and perform incision by incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Many winds are used for massaging the joints, and they relieve all pains of the body, including those of the knee and the groin, as well as the vagina; they also provoke menstruation and relieve bothersomeness and aches; and they are used for fleshotomy on women's pelvis, abdomen, and cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Finally, it is said that the entire body is relaxed and that sutures are made in the testicles of men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the pleasure of the wind is directed to the pleasure of the winds on women's thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the bellows is that it pauses the wind as soon as it begins to see and passes through with enough time, and does not prolong the position of the bellows, less pause those slightly, and return them gently, and that the humors come to the place by chance encounter.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	When you do not cease to use this and continue to enter when you see the area already swollen and inflamed and the sign of the gallstone,
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	When you shave and clean the skin little by little, and consider in the position of the body,
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that person who has a hard skin on their rare parts, covers you with a cloth and does not put any oil on it, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	When commanding the wind to enlarge the incision and make it wider, and immediately apply the necessary ointment.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If in the sinus it becomes large, you should know that you make incisions with sharp knives, and in the first cut you should enter the subtle route of the sinus and the cavity of the body.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Then in the second, with the examined water, you should examine the removal of the large sinus.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the sinus is very foul, you should make a deep incision in the last cut to be able to remove the dirt.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when you want to extract the sinus little by little or in parts, one incision is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if you want to extract more sinuses, make the incision with a larger incision; and if we know that the sinus is large, you should make the incision with a wider incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The end of the incision is the depth of the cut, which is only considered.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that of which the cut is thick, hard, dark, and the parts are straight, you should know that the holes of the winds are more open, more resolvable; if it is in summer, use olive oil or olive oil of garlic, or olive oil of comfrey, or olive oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter, use olive oil, olive oil of liquorice, olive oil of camomile, or olive oil of sinus, and those like them.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the superfluity is large, then cut it off, and if you want to make it look better, use olive oil, or oil of balsam, or oil of aloe, or ointment of anise, and let it be seen.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the ventilator is of large size and has flesh, then cover it with something that is not oil, and cover the areas of the ventilator with these locusts or with water from the sea, or with water from the bath, or with water from the laundry, and let it be seen.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And the one that has the moisture of the sand, wash your ventilators with water or with sea water and vinegar, or with any other liquid that is suitable for them.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of the one that has the superfluity of large size, wash your ventilators with water or with vinegar and sage, which is majorana, or with decoction of anise, or with camomile, and let it be seen.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And cover the ventilator with cloth; having covered it with something that is moistened with water, and let it sleep with the ventilator.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	This is a complex medical term that can be translated as: "What should be done to allow the winding of the veins before the ventilation?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When you consider the beginning: if the wind or that which gives off a sharp odor is colicky and causes inflammation, then you should know that it is caused by cold things, such as acetate of milk, and by wetting oneself in the morning and evening, and by sesame, and julep, and to the effect on them.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their walks as much as possible, and meat of sour animals, and condensed foods that are fatty, and to the effect on them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that which causes the complexion to become dry, know that it is caused by drinking too much beer and eating, and walking between morning and evening, and using little beer and food, and stopping the walks of the legs, cannabis, piss, small animals, and columbine.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And know that in the day of wind and cold, beer is greater than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And know that in some hours at Tyrus or Tyre's wine, or muscle medicine, it is muscle, or alcohol taken before wind or cold, or after, for that the principal members are comforted and the soreness is alleviated; and do not know that they take that scald.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	When the wounds that were made are winding wounds that have been paused on their flesh, and over the malleolus and gout, and the umbilicus in the locations of the joints, and the groin, these members do not suffer from winding wounds on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	It is not sought for those only but attracted to the member, as winding wounds are paused on the breast in the flow of the sac of the sac of the nipple; and they use it as that which is dissolved by ventositat freja invviscade of the member, as they pause over the abdomen and the umbilicus; thus that rare member soothes and scorches the pain that resolves ventositat.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And if it has been paused over the thighs when they have fallen into laziness or burning, then by virtue of strong attraction to attract laziness and remove the burning from that place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems when it has been paused over the flesh and the malleolus of winding wounds in those enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	This winding is managed with great success, and some of them are managed with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some of these windings are managed with full water in the abscesses of the thigh.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is because the winding is full and large that water is added alone or water in which herbs have been added to make it suitable for this purpose.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of winding managed with fire: the width of the orifice is twice that which we have formed; and the quantity of the preon is the greatest of a palm; and it is in the middle of the winding, in the location where it is in the circuit, the greatest of it, the thickness is small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	The cause of the pain may be due to rogue or lemon, large margins, leon, engulfed and scattered so that it does not lead the member to its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if the cause of the pain is on the side of the vein transverse of rogue or iron, where candle is placed over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	When this wind is too great for that which has been recommended; and the few more of that second part of the diseases and the state of him who uses that of that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The winds of the elderly are more harmful than those of the young and large-chested.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of stopping this wind is to focus on the member that extends the focus of the willow leaf gently with a few drops of wax, and place it over the midsection of the thigh in the midsection of the wind, so that the focus is ignited around the end where it will not burn the chest of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And if it is placed over the thigh of the patient, and it is said that it is over the track that has been said, then when you have the winds and do not indicate that they contain the track and that the vapor is on that track, then the wind will dissolve so much.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then uses the focus according to his own hand, and repeats it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	The greater the wind that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, thirst, in which there is no transverse or track, and it is not administered except with water, and it is focused on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the form of this: This breeze, the more it grows, the better, because it can receive a great amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	The text you provided is not in the language you described, but rather in Latin.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	The text you provided is also in Latin and translates to: "Blood clots have not been managed in any members except those in which there is no possibility of positioning a vent, due to their smallness, like the gums and teeth; or in a naked member, like the nose and ears, where they resemble.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	When it comes to the quality of using those that if you have found bloody discharges in the clothes of well-made shoes,
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	When the patient's limbs are stiff and they do not move, and no cause is found in the abdomen of those; and the chest is emptied at the beginning of the anesthesia and after the ventozas; and the thigh is relaxed after it has twisted; and they are placed on top of it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and ready.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the place can be opened by the wind, it is less painful in recovery.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	However, wash the place with cold water and agua de vieira; and it will be cleaned and expelled.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the sinus is prolonged by the pain of the blood vessels, and there are still residues, then place a damp cloth on it with water, and place it over it until the residue is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the sinus multiplies, you can powder vitriol or similar substances on it, or place them over the location until the sinus has abscessed; or they are placed over the location with the feet of the vines attached to the location, and the sinus is abscessed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	When necessary, perform a bloodletting operation, if it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then make incisions in the location where it can be safely done or insert a needle into the loci that are most affected; and let those be closed, so that when any sore appears, it does not become infected.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want to clean them, sprinkle a little of aloe or salt, or ashes, and wipe it off.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Now begins the treatment of the third part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary for the art of medicine; and it is a restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, wise that you are, do not cast down this chapter the faults of the physicians and the vulgar and those who for time do not pay attention to the freedoms of the Ancients nor read from those one letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this science of the scientists in our land is private; and you are not obliged to do it at that time; and I have not been able to do it, except by long reading of the freedoms of the Ancients and study on their understanding, within which I extract the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And accordingly direct oneself to experiment and study along the length of one's life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	I have already described everything in this chapter that pertains to my knowledge and the science I have passed; I put it before you now and relinquish it from further occupation; and I open it at the end of the description; and I show it at the end of the declaration; and I form it in various forms of the drugs that I administer in that, as is done by addition of the declaration, so have I done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter First.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collection of the fragments of bones, from those whose preliminary release is necessary before we begin to remember the fractures and different ones of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summary of the sermon; and the chapters for the understanding of those who at the beginning were the artisans and stood on the truth of these; so you and they who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And say that when an accident happens to any fracture or dislocation or torsion or twisting, you should immediately go to the beginning of the amputation or lay hold of that, or if you cannot, then by any means which is most bearable to virtue, or it is that which happened, or is very old, or is time of great heat, or of great cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	When the patient is well-nourished with herbs and lean meats and fish, and prohibits fatty meats and excessive intake of food that fills the veins with blood, entering if you are sure of not getting appendicitis, and if you do not fear an excess of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And return the patient to the first regular course that is usual for him.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the patient begins to be restored, you should ensure that this diet is not nourished by non-nutritive foods of fat and heavy ones in which the viscosity is found, as those that are made from flour with water, and meat, and bones, and cheese, and milk of cows, and fruits, and vegetables, and greens, and grapes, and similar ones, and this diet is made for coagulation of fractures and wounds.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You know that bones become soft when they are in men and in the first childbirth and in the elderly, it is not possible that they continue and are solidated later in their nature by the drying of the members of them.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	When they are healed and continue to improve over time due to the drying of those parts, and they continue to become stronger and more rigid as they approach their limits, like the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and covers the cut ends of all parts caused by any reason, seeming like glue that grows thicker as it adheres and becomes stronger within that which is conglutinated and linked, within that which causes the strength and firmness, like fire at the beginning, within that which does not prohibit that from being one of its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to stop the thighs of the patient, thighs in which gravity and viscosity and heaviness are found, as has been said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Different types of fractures occur according to the part of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fractures are different according to the part of the body, and a fracture of the pelvic bone is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the other bones, it seems that all other parts are also different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	When I remember all the cases of fracture, I find that they are distinct from one another.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There is a great diversity of fractures in their nature.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are different types of fractures in the bones; some are curved or angled, while others occur at the ends of the bones; and some are caused by the length of the bone: and so are the fractures of the ribs and pelvis and other parts, which can be caused by force or not, as when they are prepared to be written, and are a crack or disruption in the head, and a fissure small.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for all cases, it is essential to remember the specifics of each fracture in order to restore them according to what was remembered in its distinct location.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There is a lack of knowledge about bone fractures.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this reason, bone fractures are known: it is the tortuosity of the bone, and of that prominence that appears to the touch, and so of that when I understand it with my own hands.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	When there is no apparent twist in the location and it does not cause pain when touched with the thumb and the thigh does not cause great pain, then there is no need to fracture the bone.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There may be twist or a small fissure, but it is not necessary to worry about that with your hand; there may be compression of the whole; there may be pause over the part of those medicines from which you remember at that moment what is appropriate for the place; and there may be stricture subtle.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	You know that this location when it is curved and not divided into two or another so that no accidents occur in its saturation, as the whole part of its comparison, if you are careful, then you should consider what happens in your time for the correction of those that happen to you.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if you have an aposteme caut, then keep that for several days until the aposteme ceases; and remove that second hand that you can lift and draw.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You know that the restoration of that and the cauterization is done with a different bone than the one that occurred in the saturation.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then tightly tie that second one which will be the reminder of you.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If in the os of the sagged bones, it is necessary to extend this member cut off by several parts, whether it is the foot or the heel; or if the member is small; or if several cords or one cord and the ma are needed.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And if your position is at the place where you pause the member in its natural location, while the parts that are extended from the cut-off member are being tightened, you will find that you have to return those additions to their original places and according to each hand that can be placed in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And keep in mind that you should not have your force fall on the patient's thighs due to your operation or injury; and if you find yourself in a situation where you need to apply force to one bone with another, do so according to better forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And at that time, use your force advantageously on your hand there, and if sometimes another cause appears, adjust it and cut it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	When there is excessive extension and compression, it is necessary to follow the example of doctors who perform surgery by making points on the surface of the body with a pointed cautery or by causing contraction in the member they have seen during the operation of their own movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	If the joint is connected, if the position is equal and the operation is correct and strict for that member, and if you apply a bandage and keep it quiet; put the leg on top of it and make the patient turn so that the member does not get out of its place during the night and in the morning, and see the movement and activity of the member, and have to do with all the movements of the body; wait until the position of the member is a position that ensures the pain, which causes it when it is in the disposition of the position of the member or wound; if you change the member to another position where it does not feel pain, and keep it there so that the position of that member is correct and even, so that the member does not get twisted when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the stricture of the member is that which you recommend; because you know that some members are different in their shape and size and form.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	When those who are small in stature, such as the arms and hands, and resemble those, cover that which is the envelope with a fine silk cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those who are large in size, such as the thighs and buttocks, cover that which is the envelope with a tough and hard cloth, where the lip connect the member large and strengthens it throughout its entire part, and there is no space between them.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then, begin to empty your bag of equacio, place the appropriate cushion over it, on the location of that fracture am three or four times the size of the member; and hold it with a small hand the lip.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then, place it on the part that is the edge of the location of the fracture, and hold it tightly so that it does not strain the member you have strengthened in the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then, elongate the member's envelope at the location of the fracture a little, and gradually soften the stricture, so that when you take hold of the part with a large part, it does not break.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another knife and wrap the other vein around the location where you want to enclose it, and see if the enclosures are at the end of the fracture; and your operation will be in the stricture of the enclosure and in the mollification of that second one that they have said in the first enclosure.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And pause between the feathers of a lion or a fox that has an engulfed tortuosity of the fracture, if in it there is a tortuosity; and otherwise, do not pause in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And pause over the other knife, and engulf over these enclosures that are slowly formed as much as possible, if in the location there is no inflammation or post-cautery, and you pause over it that sets the post-cautery that holds the inflammation; and lay it aside for a while; and you hold over it the enclosures.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And were the enclosures of the cane of the horse's tail, and they are formed in a proper way; or are of bass wood; or of ramps of the palm; and is the width of each enclosure according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	This sentence appears to be describing the proper placement and use of a splint or cast over a broken bone. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	When the sons are large and thick, and many in number, and if they are large, as you have seen in the operation of another doctor making points on the fils of cords of the tort, and it is an error, when the stricture is not equal to the fils.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	If the sons are too thin, it is not suitable for you to be sure of the stricture, and there should not be any difference between one and another.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the wound is closed by the ends of the stitches at the location of the stricture, you should pause there for a while, whether it is made of leon or lana carmenada, as it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some visible fractures are considered as plague, and there is an accident of disruption in the code, and you will find in the capital second singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that all the cut members are not straight at first; the cause is that the member, when it is large, does not stop over the stelhas for a short time or seven or more days, according to your security of the occurrence of gangrene caut.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the manual of plasters used by the ancients, which were placed over fractures and dislocations, as well as twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	When making a splint for a broken bone, it is convenient to use a complex and majorly on the thighs and buttocks, where no heat or friction is found: and that is because you take powder of millet, and the miller's bone that you need to move the mill in its sockets.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And comfort that as it is, but do not use that thin or subtle album, and pause the comfort of it; and instead use that one.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another splint for broken or dislocated fractures and torsion: recipe of assafetida, of ladanum, of acacia, of unguent, and migra, which is made from salted millet grains, of all dracs. x; of honey and aloe of dracs. v; aloen of dracs. xx; all the parts and joints and crackles and mixtures that are in water with alcohol or album of huou if the complex of the thigh is scalped; and use this splint, which is of good composition and restores the fractured bones gently, and confirms the homes.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	This sentence is quite complex and seems to be discussing a type of medical treatment or procedure. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	When treating joint pain and bone separation from their former locations, and dealing with accidental pain in those areas and fissures and fractures: hold a clean bandage and dip it in vinegar and oil, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, this ointment does not have restorative properties, but rather helps to remove and expel pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another ointment that restores the incision: take fresh leaves of fig tree and saffron leaves; mix them all together and make an ointment.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Ointment for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want to resolve the aftermath of trauma: recipe includes aloe vera, camomile, violet flowers, flour of ers, all parts in equal amounts; they are all grinded and mixed with oil, if the member does not scar.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	However, if it is scarred, comfort the member with that water of humidified colander or with that water and use it on the patient.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another ointment for quick resolution, when severe trauma occurs and the member is damaged: recipe includes aloe vera and semen of li, and balsam, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all parts in equal amounts; they are all grinded and mixed with water of sauze or dousa or water of vi, depending on the quality of the member and the color of the skin.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	When Yocantha does not find in the free market that there is a need to place something on the member trenchant, it is necessary for the restoration of the sinew, and it is recommended that there be more between bigness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Gualia has been seen that there are points on the member trenchant for the restoration of the sinew and the causes in which there is drying due to lack of heat, which is similar to that recommended by others.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Ointment that soothes wounds and pain: recipe mixed, of oils, of hairs of the skin or pennyroyal, and aloe, and salt, divided into portions; they are mixed and wrapped and closed, and it is made into an ointment.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity be according to what covers the wound and is well separated, because you consider if there is no pain or discomfort or the sinew is not broken, it is not bad of its place, you do not open too soon.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is pain or discomfort or inflammation at the site of the wound, you should close it or remove that in the hour, and take away the ointment from the wound.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	When the member is wet and a sponge is placed on it, and it is submerged in warm water, and that part is washed with soap to cleanse the area where the prickling sensation and pain have subsided; and allow the member to rest for an hour; and then cover the wet hair with a cloth dipped in vinegar or rose oil, and place it on the member again after an hour to ensure there is no cataract formation, and to reduce inflammation of the member, and to alleviate the pain of the member.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And repeat that constriction gently and lightly and stretch it without causing pain, and gently apply it inside to ensure its safety first.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If at any time there is cataract, weakness, pain, inflammation, and all other accidents have become less severe, and you are advised to apply plaster and constriction, then repeat that constriction as you began with the gum engagement.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If no harm comes to the member from those causes that have been mentioned, then do not remove it for less than three days or four or seven; and some wounds are completely healed within twenty days after your departure, as they have said, within the time the fracture adheres, and when it is settled in the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And you adjust in the stricture of more than in your first stricture's, and auster in the congestion of the food of the thigh, secondly after the rememoration of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see the place of the fracture has dried out and lessened than it should, you know that this food is prohibited to reach there; and therefore, gently squeeze that water from the whole wound that delivers that; and keep it for three days; and then open the stricture a little, and for this operation, give nutrition to the member, and it will heal.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If the restorative clays of the fracture of another wound do not restore it to its original state when it is not restored at the beginning, then after it covers, and it is restored according to the tortuosity, it is an error in the operation of those, and there is great fear, and if it is right, it will enlarge the Antics in free liberty and aggravate or obstruct.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, for it is reasonable that it does not happen.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	When a fracture occurs in the head, it is called a skull fracture.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are dislocations, and their figures are various, and their causes are distinct. Four types of fractures one is caused by percussion of the skull, and the percussion affects all the bones that enter the cranium, which leaves the bones behind as if they were in the cheek, and for this reason this species is called a conchoidal fracture; or the skull pierces a part of the bone, and pierces the flesh and does not pass through the piercing to the back of the bone; and this species of fracture is called avulsion.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these kinds of fractures is great or small, and of those that are contrived or artificial; and the cause of it is percussion or caustication over the bone, and its appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrant that has already approached the pancreas which leaves the bones; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these kinds of fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	When a bone breaks, it is healed in the bones, in the subtlety of the small hair petite, and therefore this type of capillary fracture is called this.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This fracture is caused by impact or percussion of the nail and appears to enter any layer of the bone into the parts of the fingers, and it is made in the concave location as happens to the bones when they are hit by the hammer and part of them enters the parts of the fingers.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is indeed made in the bones of the human body, as if it were the heads of the nails.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures are small and like threads separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find that this is completely in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you would recognize all these types of fractures by detection over those and by the examination of their attempts and the flesh that is rotten that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is recognized by that which is discovered over the bone, and it is removed, and it remains on the attempt, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture, it is considered at the beginning the accidents of the thigh, and you should consider those that signify by their meaning for the manifestation of pain over the part, such as vomiting of color, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of vote, and sincopi, and acute fever, and edema of the toes and rigidity of the same, and resemblance to those in greater positions, and its dose is not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you sometimes encounter non-corresponding accidents, hope for health, and begin the treatment of the patient.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause that comes to you in the beginning is the same as it is infected and it is in the days of winter, and you should know that you study on the outer part of the bone from which the day of the twelfth total position has passed.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, you should know that you have covered the bone from which the seventh day has passed, having that as though the bone is corrupted by the panniculus, and that accidents will occur that have been changed.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has already penetrated the calvarium, covering it with the skull, and the fragments are broken and split, then you should consider that the part is infected and torn, according to what I recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	It is said that you have infected the thigh with the plague, and over the bones, follow the second custom and apply your hand according to the figure of the plague, and it should be on the affected part.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you find the bone, use the detection of the bone, flushes of sin or aphasia cautery, and then apply your hand to the area as before, and it should be sated with the aphasia cure when it is sedated, and you will be sure of the flow of the sin; and then start at the circumference of the bone and in the ablation of the bone.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is one of two hands for operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The one hand is that you insert the bones into the thigh with an osteotomy saw, and this is the form of it: And then administer another osteotomy saw, a few push that one; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more osteotomy saws that were pushed earlier.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And cover that you need several names of osteotomy saws, of which some push more easily than others; and some are short and those are in the end of sharpness of their ends, and they are of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	When using the above-mentioned remedies, it is important to note that they should be applied with caution and only by experienced practitioners. The language used in this text is a form of medieval Latin, which was widely used in medical texts during that time period. It is important to understand the context and
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are hard and strong, you should cover them with a layer of skin or flesh before inserting the scalpel into the circuit of the denuded part that you will administer the inscissors to, which are called non-penetrating taravels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	I do not name any other part but the testicle itself, unless it is called the head of the testicle, which is the end or margin of the taravel, which resembles a margin or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take a large number of these taravels, which are suitable for the spicitude of each bone, until you reach the extremity of the one that is sharp at your present position in all parts of the brain, the quantity in length and breadth is second to the quantity of spicitude of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of teravels: The quality of piercing into the circuit of the cut bone is that you place the teravel on the bone and revolve it around that as you know if the bone has been penetrated; and then move the teravel to another location, and pause there until it has passed through the entire extent of the size of the ring or goes around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then insert the blade into each part of the bone, and make it subtle so that you can over it without lifting it, as they have said, when you have divided the bone, or if your hand is there, or if another cause for such distortions occurs which would have appeared at that point, as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure that you guard the blade with all caution that it does not touch any cause of the cipher.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when the bone has been perforated and is separated from the cipher if it continues on you, and you extract it, be sure that it is not caught in the sharpness of the other parts of the bone as if it were an inscissor, but rather be sure that it is subtle and not caught in the other blades.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If you encounter any small, sharp bones and joints, then grasp them with that ease which is due to you as a surgeon; and thereby cure the pain and find out which ones have caused it.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other hand of the operation is longer, taking more time, which is praised by Guy de Champagne and his followers; and this is the saying of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to discover the part of the bone in which the fracture was made with great force and manifestation, until when you have discovered that part and have paused at the end of this slow but pleasant cut of this type:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	E is that the lenticular part is like a lion and does not penetrate any cause, and the sharp part is on two lateral sides in length; which means that the lenticular part should be adjusted to the cipher am the face of the sharp bone at the incident agua in the os.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E if you cut through the incision of a part with a small malhet when all the bones are cut, and you are sure that the panicoil will not happen in this accident that you fear in any hand, and if the physician 14 were the fool of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If the pain is caused by any reason and attaches to the bone of the ankle in certain places of the bone, it will be located at the extremity of the ankle bone that lenticular, and will be facilitated at the place where the pain is located, which is facilitated by the bones of the foot.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the fracture does not penetrate into the bone, and that which is separated or remains on the bone is the face of the foot, and there are roughnesses and subtle spots on it, it is likely that those roughnesses and subtle spots are caused by the razor blades that you have prepared for different quantities so that you can possibly administer those in all places with appropriate pus for them and the pus of the second part where you lose your operation that broken bone and the figure of the foot.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And cover that you administer in your reason with the one that raises the bone at the beginning with the purulent pus of those razor blades, and use as much as possible of the subtle pus of the foot, and do not stop giving until you have given all the purulent pus of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	When there is any small fracture of the hair or subtle fracture, follow the treatment that you have used to correct the position of the bone.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	When it comes to the cause, it is not expected that all those who have studied in that art will be able to master it.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And as they have shown us in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panoply is tightened when you reduce the bone, you will find that you hold one handful of cloth for each unit of plague, and submerge that in warm olive oil, and place it over the orifice of the plague; and take another doubled or tripled handful of cloth and submerge that in warm olive oil and place it over the first handful and press aloe on that to alleviate the pain you can apply to that, not straining it beyond what the plague can bear only; and administer aloe to that part, and do not squeeze it beyond the quantity of plague you have.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And keep that on for one day or two after you are sure of the cure; and remove it and administer medicines as needed for thirst, such as linen and flour, and powder of enses and alchemy, and like substances for those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is that you make of these powders that they be powdered over the skin, as they are dry; and generally, they are administered in this entire medicine of whose property it is that it purges and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	You should follow your virtue that is causing the plague in your curacy; and do not be in its negligence of engagement nor another; nor should you add virulence to it; for when it is adjusted over the pannicule of the brain, corrupt that and prick that, and ascend upon the malady with that malicious wickedness.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And ascend upon the skull of the head, when it is made monstrous by the bone and more so when the care of it is removed, and darkens in its surface; and then consider that if you ascend to the malady the accidents that have been told are true.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not darken but from the medicine that is placed below, and it is virtue of that medicine that causes that darkness, then know that you hold in your hand one part and three parts of olive oil, and apply those lines to the skull, and place that over the crypt; and care for that with the specifics of cure that are suitable according to what is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When doing a nose job (restoration) it is customary to use cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	It is not the nose that is cut but rather the bones that are divided into parts and then removed, or one of those some cartilages, for if you have two bones, the part where the nose is located is cartilaginous, and it is not cut and does not fracture, neither at the nose nor in its surrounding areas.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the parts of the bone is cut, you should know that you insert the small piece into the nose, and that you mend the fracture at the top of the small piece, and at the point where it was broken, and then return the nose to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this is for your convenience, and keep in mind that you should not close the wound for your operation on the patient's thigh.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the bone division and the small piece does not fit well at the end of the bone, then you should know that it is necessary to make it fit well at the end of the bone.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in several parts, you should make it look like that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	When restoring the thigh on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then use about the sixth or seventh part of the cautery for the closure of the incision.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert the end of a draping bandage into the tip of the nose, if the fracture is in one piece, or if it is in several pieces, and if it is in the largest piece, so that it fills the cavity of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And tell the ancient restorers that the splints should be wrapped in albumen or powdered chalk, and that the meca should be wrapped in a cloth; and lay it aside when the bone is fixed and the cartilage is endurable.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some wounds may be in the nose, instead of splints, because leon's drapery is too thick; and it is that you have fractured the nose before and that the thigh is not restricted from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, make splints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If another swelling occurs after the cauterization, apply the following plaster: mix the honey or the wax in a mortar and pour it into a thin layer on the affected part, or use a poultice.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not have swelling after cauterization, you should know that you can apply a poultice made of flour and ermine powder on the affected area; and place a piece of cloth over it, and do not let the honey cause any harm.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If you fracture or break the bones of the nose, you should know that you can cut over those parts, and extract the pieces using instruments suitable for those parts; and close the wound, and cure it with what is appropriate for the nose, which hardens and consolidates, and applies plasters suitable for that.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you have a swelling in the nose, you should know that you can cure it by compressing it and administering intravenous solutions of plasma as needed to achieve complete recovery.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not painful, observe if the fracture is deformed only, and not split in two and curved to the sides, then its recognition is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Then, if the fracture is in the left side, introduce the right indicator in the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is in the left mandible, introduce the other indicator from the left mandible; and thus, to facilitate the deformity of the dental fracture, use the same bone of the other side of the defect.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the mandible fracture is already separated into halves, observe that you administer extensions of parts on either side according to right angles, as long as it is possible to align them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if the jaw dislocation occurs with teeth, strengthen those that you think are bent to the gold or silver wire or yield; and pause over the split mandible, and over the drape doubled, and over the great knot of the lower jaw, or a single tooth of the length of the mandible, according to what you have arranged the groove of the teeth and that it is convenient for its application, as long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	When ordering the patient to use rest and tranquility, and to stop eating the foods that cause lethargy.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you suspect that the figure has changed in any way, you should cut and remove it on the third day; and then correct what has changed and apply powder made from sand, alum, or flour, which you had left on the wound, and place a layer of lion's fur over it.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And after applying and adjusting the plaster over it, and ensuring that the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, as it will not come out until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; this fracture is strengthened in three weeks with four watched days.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another accidental stroke of lightning occurs, you should administer the medicine that has been given in four watched days when the patient is healed, and keep that stroke of lightning from happening again.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is infected, you should consider if it is due to the separated or split bone, and you should carefully observe which of those sutures is appropriate for that in the removal of those from the limbs.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the wound of the plague is straight, then you should enlarge it according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have finished cutting those stitches, and if they are not too tight, then use the scissors of the plague if it is large; otherwise, place your hand over one of the fastenings that is suitable for this and covers that, in order to enter if it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol v. means "Chapter V." It is a section
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the shoulder restoration when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	If the shoulder is twisted, the clavicle is broken at the point where the muscle is located, and this fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it is broken, it is separated, or it is separated into two parts that do not have sutures, and it is less difficult for the restoration of the shoulder; or it is possible that the fracture occurred in the shoulder, and it is difficult to restore the shoulder; or it is possible that the fracture is ample.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation on that is when the fracture is ample, it is that you should have two assistants, so that one holds the assistant and follows the dislocated shoulder, and the other extends the collarbone to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	When the fracture is in the form of a line that goes through the center of the bone and is not prominent or hollow, it is called a transverse fracture by doctors.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you need to extend the area, place a cloth or thread under the thigh, and make it as large as necessary; then extend and lift the collar and cut the cloth along the fracture line that goes through the center of the bone.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the end of the collar to the desired position, then make sure that the thigh is relaxed over the pelvis, and place your hand on the muscle of the leg, pressing it with a cushion of greater size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The physician presses the muscle of the leg on the parts that are still exposed, and makes sure that the bone of the collar is elevated as much as possible, and then corrects the fracture and places it according to the lines indicated by the doctor.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain in the collar and muscles, place your hand on that area and remove any knots for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is held in the bone, you should make an incision in the flesh of that one of the cuts that you have seen before, because you had paused further down the shoulder where the collarbone serves as the sternum; and this is the form of this:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It seems like the form of this is that of a butcher's knife; and its length is according to what you need for it, according to the size of the bone or its thickness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should be according to what you can possibly make it for the operation; that there be ends as far apart as possible, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the plague that you have incised when you extracted the marrow from the bone is wide, and it is sure to cause an abscess, then you should adjust the lips of the plague according to the suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess, then you should fill the plague with cloths and powders according to the amount of the cut in the plague.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you encounter anaphylaxis cauterization, inform the patient that it involves cutting through the skin and applying oil, and then stop there.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the stricture of the bone is caused by inflammation and separation, it is because you apply flour paste made from albumin of egg whites, and stop over the fracture line, and then reduce the swelling on both sides of the ankle and the knee, and sometimes when the stricture of the fracture is reduced, it is not hidden under your clothes.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And so, do not be concerned if the stone does not cover the fractured bone; and for this reason, you should check the wound every day, if when the limb is softened or the stone has become damaged, you must then correct this and tighten the suture.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then pause the patient's sleep on his neck, and pause further down his titillis so that he can sleep on his side in the bed with a small pillow; because that is elevated the assistant of his arm from the shoulder of that, and thus the fracture of the shoulder is elevated to the muscle; or if his arm is lying on his collarbone.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the ligament if it does not happen in the correct place or hernia, enter within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And if you have seen the face of the patient and it is swollen, adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave within what is restored and is coagulated the fracture of the shoulder.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted every month for 28 days, and some are made in the time of that man.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A sharp-edged spatula is cut at the location of the shoulder and not cut except for the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	When you cut the leg of the patient — and it is cut in the middle of the leg — and it is not known otherwise than by touch, then do as follows: first, determine the figure of the fractured bone, then prepare for the reduction of that bone by cutting a second incision, and reduce it back to its natural shape in the entire direction of the bone that is possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then pause over the powder of honey of albumen and lemon, and pause a pulverizer of duplicate cloth; and then pause over the stela lada of the subtle table according to the quantity of the spatula totally or less than a few.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the stela is now convex in the holes of the spatula's point, then do as follows: cut that convexity with lemon, and perhaps the stela will be equal afterwards.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then stretch as much as possible the wet long part of the constraint without being tightened by the stela inside that it is not strained of the local location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the limb in every day; and all watched that is softened, another watched and stretch the leg and equalize the stela if it is strained of the local location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When the patient lies down, place a pillow under their head.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spoon is restored in XX days or in XXXV.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Then, when that number is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and you know surely that this is of the bones from which the beginning was not confused nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the location of the knee joint and clean the area, then you should cut it off, and take it out, and follow what has been said in the fracture of the sadacio of apostema cauda if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest some ribs are broken in their place and then they bend; but the ends of them remain that are not cut off and are still whole.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents when the rib is cut, it goes down to the parts of the dint and causes great pain, difficulty in what is done, coughing, and much fever and vomiting; and it is declared in that cavity of the bone that is cut and not hidden from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of the patient is that the thigh is placed on the patient's back, and a pillow is placed between the thighs on a cushion; and he should press the muscles of the thigh, adjust the costals of the thigh to the maximum of two costals, and gently guide you in the operation of the patient and the equilibrium throughout the entire hand that can be used and that is convenient for this, until the figure of the bone is returned to its original position.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And he should pause over the plaster and stop and pause the expansion of the table under the softness of sauce or caligo and of what seems to be levitating, so that you can wrap it in a cloth; and he should gently guide you over the cut bone that is not marred; and go through the incision on the back, and tighten the stricture decent; and consider the incision at all times, and when it is softened, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to provoke exfoliation of that thickened or pruritic, painful, or apoplexy that has occurred in the place, you should gently cut and deslip that and remove the plaster and correct what occurs by hand of cure of the patient; and reduce the plaster, if sometimes the face; and adjust the stricture when it is healthy.
Capitol .viii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	The translation of "De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas" is: "Of the restoration of the ribs when they
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	The translation of "Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas" is: "You should know that ribcage fractures do not usually occur in large areas of the chest, but rather at the ends of the ribs; and if they do not break at the ends of the ribs, they will not collapse into the cavities but rather into those cartilaginous
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The translation of "E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz" is: "And I know that the pain is not affected by the questioning of the doctor, but rather by the words
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The translation of "E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel" is: "And the restoration should be done as soon as possible, following the most likely method, and if it is not possible to engulf it, then plaster and reinforce the broken bone at the end, if that is what is indicated.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is leaning towards the intercostal spaces, you should go to the buttocks with intense pain and puncture, as if puncturing that which has bled, and for this reason, place the gauze; and you should experience difficulty in coughing, and throat, and vomiting of bile; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	When the ancients were already inventing such things.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	When they said that they were making cuts in the thighs to cause inflammation and swelling, so that the belly is flattened and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the unfavorable parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We would not have known this for so long if it were not for the cause of generating cautery, unless it happened; and if it has already happened, you can help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They would advise those who have placed the windpipe and have enough strength; and it seems to reason, but it is feared that the wind will direct the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They would advise those who have placed the windpipe and have enough strength: that this place is covered with lint that has been submerged in oil cautery, and there are powders between the ribs when it is filled, which is the wound engulfed when it envelops the second retraction; and that this curing of the thighs is a cure for the wind and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the patient's leg is severely constricted and does not allow for pain relief, and the doctor punctures the membrane with a point, they should be careful around the leg, covering the area over which they will operate, discovering the torn costa, and placing the instrument that preserves the cipherac, the rememoration of which is preceded, and which inscribes the bones easily, and extracts the one.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And if you adjust the lips of the wound, if it is large, apply ointment, and care for that after it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you accidentally cut yourself with a needle, place your hand on the affected area and cover it with powdered rose oil, and the leg will be treated as if it were the wound caused by the needle.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	If he is hypoglycemic about the latch that sleeps, after it is cured.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol. This is not a medical term and does not need
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Restoration of spinal fracture of the two and the collarbone.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some cracks have been observed in the bones of the neck, and they are attracted to their traction, and seemingly to the spines of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When gout occurs in the foot and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider that if the joints are already softened, numb, and dead, and cannot be touched, extended, or stretched, and when pressure is applied to them with a needle or a point, there is no pain, then you know that it is not curable, and in the end, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if there is pain when pressure is applied to those joints with the needle or point, you know that the shoulder of the bone is saved and that the disease is not curable.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spines of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that it is already softened, occur in the parts where it occurs in the most, and when you press on the shoulder, you feel ventilation and digestion of the will, and some veins are rolled over the shoulder and cannot urinate, you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not expect recovery in the treatment of the patient.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	When no harm occurs to any of those, the cause is better and provides relief.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of the pain is that you perforate at the acupuncture point where you place your hand over the spine, or if it is red and swollen, or if there are any other signs; then place your hand over that area for a while until the acupuncture point is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place one of the comforting and enduring ointments on that area, and stretch it; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not sleep on the part where the pain will subside when it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If harm occurs to the tibia or any other cause that is separated from it, you must cover the wound with the blanket and keep the bone; and then adjust the lips of the plague, if it is large, and take care of that am alcu encarnatiu of the enguentz, when it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the bone of the thigh is split and the end of the toe is broken, you must cover the wound with the other hand in the anus, and tie the cut bone to the other one as possible for equilibrium; and place your hand over the ointment and bandage, if they are given for those, and stretch that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel sharp pains in that area, then press on it and leave it alone, and cure the inflammation as the doctor prescribed after the patient is cured.
Capitol .x.	Capitol. This is a Latin word that means "capital
De restauracio de la ancha.	De restauracio de la ancha. This phrase means "of the wide restoration." However
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the wide thighs are so broken, and if they break, the fracture of those is not a simple communication at their extremities and are inscribed along the longitudinal axis and decline towards the dentition; and they cause pain in the hip and the puncture, and the cushion becomes stunned when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it when it is over the fracture, and the figure of it is as follows:
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is at the end of it, then you should cut that second part according to what is appropriate for your hand, and it will be adapted to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long or if it declines towards the dentition, then you should put the hip on your belly over which you have prepared the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	When you have swallowed that, place your hand over the plaster, and place your thumb over that plate of lead or nail, and press firmly on the one you do not fear a puncture of fracture or removal of the needle.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	When the doctor enguails the concavity with their hand that presses on the entrance where the stricture is located, and commands the patient to lie on their side or turn away from it, it means that the doctor is about to perform a procedure to relieve the pain.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an eclipse of the humor occurs, stop extending the part and its restoration as soon as it is sedent in the humor, and pause over it that settles that following one which precedes; and then return to the restoration of the part and strengthen that ayssi as it was before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If something happens to the bones or are broken, then you must treat them.
Capitol .xi.	This appears to be a date written in the format of Day.Month
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The arm is that which is between the thighs and enters into the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then you must restore the arm in one of two ways, of which one is the one that you hold with your thumb planted like this:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	They are connected at two ends by threads, and then they are hung from the raised place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the path over a seal; and then let go of the arm that is broken, which will come into the socket of the bone to which it is annexed by its curve.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it over that heavy cause, or the master extends it to the parts left; and then the caulk and the fracture are in the same direction, if the fracture returns according to its course.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other hand is that the path is bent over the head of the neck and suspends the hand of the collar of the arm, and commands two masters who one holds that the fracture is in its place, and the other holds the end of the arm; and then they extend from their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the extension to be tight, then you should press firmly on the fracture of the limb and on the other limb, and thus the two ministers will extend to their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	If the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then you should place a cushion under the curve of the limb and the other side of the fracture needs to be held by the hand.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If the fracture is at the ankle, then you should place the limb over that location and on that foot.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Tighten that as much as possible and work on it, and then apply it according to the size you cover and if it does not cause a fistula, do not tighten it further.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs, then loosen the tie on the seventh day and pause over the wet skin that becomes red within a few days of pausing the abscess, and then tighten it again.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The maneuver to tighten that is paused with plaster over the fracture, and then wrap it around the plaster; and adjust the arm over the helper, and hold the hand over the joint of the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And pause the wrap and tighten the arm over the helper's arm so that the arm is in place of the splint, if not for any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	When using needles.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	For you place the needle over the fracture at that point where there is a pus and it is stronger than the other needles; and place between each of the needles the latitude of the joint, and its longitude according to the trapezoid plus three times the total part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And hold tightly on the needles at the stricture that I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	For you stricture over the location of the fracture is tightly stretched.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	For you along the fracture is a smaller stricture.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if sometimes the situation of the needles and the stricture is as they have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its usual position, then you do it.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then you remove the stricture and the needles in the day that they have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And you consider the limb in all parts for three days so that it does not happen in the place prudently or inflamed; or it is forbidden the food to reach the member because of the superfluity of stricture; and then adjust everything according to what they have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are over fifty years old and have not experienced any cause of gout, do not delay the application of this remedy for more than three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let his bed be over the patient's back, and the pillows be on his stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand over the full pillow of wool, and consider in all hours of the day or night whether the figure of the cut member is not deliberate nor dissolved, or if the limb is mollified, then correct this entirely according to your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And let the patient fast according to the order that has been given to him, and make sure that the fasting is gentle from the beginning until it is tightened; and let you cover the food of the patient.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four common remedies of the pillow and bed are that they should be strengthened for forty days; and you should cover that they are not delayed and are administered in baths and medicines that correct those.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is an open wound, you should not delay applying the remedy to that limb and the splints for several days or for two months.
Capitol .xii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	The translation of "De restauracio de fractura del bras" is "On the restoration of a shoulder
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The translation of "De restauracio de fractura del bras" is "On the restoration of a shoulder"; "Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils" means "Shoulder is composed of two bones which are called collarbones"; "dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejo le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus" means "one is small, and the other is the one that pushes out the small one, and the other is large and the one that holds the
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	E fort leu es trencat le focil major solamente, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemp." means "And the larger collarbone is often cut only, or the small one, and both are often broken into pieces.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera." means "And when the smaller collarbone is cut, the restoration of it requires careful work, and the care of it requires careful work.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	E quan es trencut le focil de lu dejo la fractura de lu es mal, e la sanacio de lu es dificil." means "And when the larger collarbone is cut, the restoration of it is often bad, and the care of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	When the bones of that part are broken, it is called a fracture.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	If the small bone that is broken is the little toe, it is convenient for the surgeon to intervene, and you must restore the position of the toe, which can be easily done by gently pulling it back.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the large bone is broken, you must pull it out as far as possible.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both bones are broken, you must pull them out as hard as possible.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And if you pull the figure of the woman out, you must restore the position of the leg and extend it over a cushion, and place the fingers of the hand in the parts that are mentioned above, and then all other words should be placed below them, and the body should be placed on a cushion that is tilted at an angle.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if the cushion is placed under the foot or ankle of the leg, so that the body does not collapse.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And if the doctor extends the arm of the part that is pulled out towards the shoulder or elbow, and another doctor extends it in a similar manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	When the physician examines the joint and finds that it is swollen, they should choose the best figure that can be.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the measurement of the bone there are any deficiencies, then you should drill holes completely in that place according to your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If in that separate part of the bone there is a broken codon and you do not see your hope for its restoration, then you should cut off that part and take another one as described by those who have told you.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is in the hip, and I have already made this capital single case, then take the care of that one.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you encounter a fissure at the beginning of your restoration, then line up one cloth as follows: a red olive and white wax, and it should be between precision and subtlety, and press the cloth over that subtle fissure when the fissure is ready to be closed; then remove the cloth and pause the prepared powder of clay, and place the stela as follows: the stela that was paused on the fractured part with a little force.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You know that the number of stars in the arm you saw was in the major positions, or if it is a fracture in one bone or in two bones.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then stop the traction on the site of the fracture with great and violent force, and when less than the extirction of the parts from the fracture or the parts at its bases, stop the traction as soon as possible after the rememoration of the patient at the beginning of the crown.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the plasters that envelop the fracture are very humid, not hard or rough, and the one that fits best is the one that is most suitable for the specifically subtle and coarse, as has been recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member and the limb at the appropriate time.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if you happen to encounter any cause for which rectification is necessary, please act as soon as possible with that member, and cover the member with wet cloth until that disturbance ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And the member should not be tightened when it rests, and then return the traction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the extriction has already been softened and the bone has been re-growing and appears similar to those, then you should correct everything with your own virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider whether the nutrient can reach the member due to superfluity of stricture, for which they cover that softens it a little and makes it less tight over several days as it runs into that nutrient, and apply that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If there is no cause for those that have been said to happen at the thighs, they do not cover that it has been slid within twenty days or outside of them.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And if the thigh is suspended by its own virtue of movement, and make that sleep on the side of the belly.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Do you know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or sixty-two days, or rather in fifty-eight days, and then it follows the arrangement of the complexes and the arrangements of virtue?
Capitol .xiii.	Capitulum XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of fracture of the thumb of the thigh and of the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Do you know that the thumb of the thigh and the fingers are fractured, and they do not happen to them but by violent movements seen.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When one experiences a fracture or dislocation of the leg, it is necessary to cover the thigh with a cloth and secure it with a bandage, then pause the leg at that point and extend it as much as possible.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the master extends the shattered bones and places the foot on them, pressing down until they are in good contact.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then cover the area with plaster and stop, unless one experiences pain afterward; then pause at that point according to the size of the wound, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the sprain is in the thumbs of the fingers, and cover it with cloth, making it seem like a support for the hand, commanding the foot to tighten around that as if it were a spring; then make it long enough to cover the thumb.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the cloth is long enough to cover the thumb, as if the hand were applied to the finger; then tighten it around that point.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the ends of the fingers, cover it with cloth and place another piece of cloth under the end of the finger, so that the hand is straight and tense; then pause the tightening, as if it were rolled around the ring between the fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a fracture occurs in any of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the little finger, cut it off immediately and cover it with a cloth, and apply pressure to the palm with your hand, and place a piece of cloth on top to prevent further injury and keep it clean.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any other finger, cut it off in the same way as in that one, or in the index, or in the earlobe, or in the anus; or all of them are cut at once, which is better; or place your hand on that small piece of cloth, as they have said in the pus.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and above all, the disposition of the stitching and opposing — as in the second operation — I say that it covers when any cause occurs, according to the narrative of the case.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of restoring a bone fracture of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh that are cut open are divided and declared to the patient according to what is converted into the part where the pus is located.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the patient's condition is done in such a way that one bandage is placed over the fracture and another bandage further down the fracture, and the abdomen is laid prostrate on the side belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the surgeon extends the bandage to its full length according to the quality of the bone in the location of the fracture.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is necessary to tighten the bandage at the knee, then place the bandage tightly at the top of the thigh, so that the extension catches in the femur, and the other bandage further down the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the taping is tight at the knee, then place the bandage tightly at the top of the thigh, and have the extension at the parts further down.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the surgeon aligns the bones as much as possible within the joints, reducing the second natural and the bone is united by good union; you cover that places plaster and stricture, if not causes to the member apothesis.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If you injure the apothesis, then you must remove it within a few days after the apothesis has started to separate, and return to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	When the stricture of the patient's joint is: cover that covers over the fracture with a hard needle, bend it into two or three loops, and remain in the superfluity; and cover that enters the talo and the tip of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long thread between the thigh and the joint of the denol, and let the ends of the thread come out at the opposite sides, and wrap them around the joint and the thigh as much as possible that is superfluous from the needle.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place your hand over the thigh in the location of that astelhas fracture, and place one stone on the bones of the joint.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the spaces between the joint and the thigh with cloths, so that the stricture is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And begin the stricture as hard as possible over the location of the fracture with three or four envelops, and when you have fewer liaments from the location of the fracture, your stricture will be smaller and hold more and less.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend the ends of the umbilical cord to the parts where it passes through the foot's cavity, and firmly hold the ends of the other strings of the belly per se that the umbilicoid not be torn from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And apply the strain over that, so that it does not happen to the corroding or post-mortem member, nor to the cauda nor to the inflammation, and if it happens to any cause of those, then cut me a piece of that, and correct what happens totally, according to what has been said by the watchers.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is pain from the bone that is placed, then cover that second with what is possible for you; otherwise, fence it around and remove that, and cure that which precedes the remembrance within which it is cured.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And if some watchers firmly hold this fracture of the thigh or another that is adjusted to the other strings, then as has been said in the helper and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of that, it does not happen to the thigh claudication; and if it is restored alone, or another one that is applied to the other string, then you need to walk that of which you have been tempted to walk.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the thigh is stretched in fourteen days or a few months or a few months, and this depends entirely on the variety of the complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitulum XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	When it comes to the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone,
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that a collarbone fracture can occur due to violent impact or fall.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture occurs, it is not just a crack or split in the bones, and that causes pain or discomfort, and everything is affected by that feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of the fracture is such that it seems to be held together as if it were broken, but it is actually fixed and reinforced according to what can be achieved with equality and ease and convenience and production.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply plaster and press on that round piece; and tighten the string as necessary for that.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions that have been recommended for other fractures, and see how to apply pressure and appearance to those who have opposed this accident to this one that is convenient within what is healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shinbone.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the thigh there are two bones of which one is large, and it is named after the thigh; and the other is fine, and it is called the shinbone.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And you know that in the case of fractures of the bones that occur in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason a restoration is made of the shoulder as a restoration of the arm engagement, and the operation of the arm is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if these three bones are pressed together, the thigh becomes converted into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the fine bone is pressed together, the thigh is converted into the parts of Denant.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the large bone is pressed together, it causes damage to that part, and those causes are not known to you.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then maintain extension, equality, and ligamentous support according to that engagement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the thigh is due to lack of muscle strength, then extension should be tighter and less league, and it will help your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the chamber, there is one cause for operating on the arm, and when you uncover the stitches and see that the entire operation is completed, you take pliers of iron that are placed in front of the causes that are placed in front of them, and those that are made of brass; also of those that have a small amount of dressing, and not of the hands, and it is the length of those that follow the length of the chamber, and the end of the denier inside the pus.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And it is wrapped around each drape in several layers according to the length of the body, and one is placed over the edge of the chamber of one part and the other part of the other part, and they are of the denier inside the pus at the bottom of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And you have the dresses stitched in three locations of the dress extremities and at the middle location, where this structure of the chamber is prohibited from the clinar to the part of the right and left, and it is for good practice.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And an administration of iron wire according to the length of the chamber has already been made; and it is placed in the chamber by the movement of that.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	When you are primarily doing this in a break, and when that really hurts you.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider in each day the camba and study that one for further studies, and you guard against apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of those happens, then stop what you are doing and come back to this as soon as it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and of the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not break all at once; fewer bones of the foot break some visible ones; and the toes of the foot rarely break, and only twist in their position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot break and sometimes those bones are raised above each other between them, then return the thigh to rest on the ground prepared as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And place the other foot on that which is raised from those bones, and call those, and pull them, and untie them when you turn them in their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and bandage, and then on the stomach of the foot a small tableau with two plates pressed.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then apply force to that part of the foot according to its structure, because you have wrapped it in drapes and other causes that indicate it.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three days or four have passed, remove the limb, then you will find the bones dislocated, or they are twisted, and the operation is performed on those with chisels and hammers.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If you say that the bones are twisted, then restore them and set them back in place as you advised me in the restoration of those that you mentioned to you.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then stop the twisted bone at the second point of the length of that, and put a little nail on it; and then on the foot this table, which I advised you to use, and apply force to that part according to its structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If you say that the bones are twisted in two or three or more, then you stop on each part of its amount wrapped in drapes, and apply force to the table on the base of the foot, and hold it over one of the plates of the table for the belly of the foot so that it holds well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you to not forget that you do not consider all the causes that I have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that have been told to you; and pause for all accident that I cover with this.
Capitol .xviii.	1. Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's conception is three months old, then make that cut in that side, and bend it towards the part of the two, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And if the midwife does not cut the cord, and it is done in the woman's belly as she hopes; and if the woman is cut, and raises the head of the child a little at a time, until all that is outside the part of the belly where the cord was cut and the os trincat returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And if you pause the powder on the back of the child, and when you want to urinate, the cord is made easier and the urine, and reduce it and return that second powder through the same hole that was first, and return to the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And fast for seven days or until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take once a bottle of olive oil and strengthen on the umbilic of the child a canula of cane; and enter the whole vesicle into the belly of the child, and infuse through the canula as much as the vesicle is inflated due to the belly, until the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	If the wound is fully closed and remains so for several days after being treated, then it is considered healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the joints of the knee or ankle are swollen, administer treatment and medication in the water that has been recommended for the joint of the leg.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And the water that is useful is not hidden in these immediate fractures and does not return often, mainly because of the study and use of this free word; fourth, that fracture means to you in the major positions of the drafter in restoration and stricture, and then understand be.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the wound of the man is closed, take guarguamela from anywhere, put it in that; and place your hand over the envelope of the dress, and wrap it, and leave it for three days or until the end, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for that which has been injured by the fracture, and especially if the bones are large as those of the thigh or shoulder, or seem to be like that, that you cut and suture that much so as to meet the conditions of suture for you or testify how many have said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the plague flows through the incision, you should cover that you are standing at the retention of the wound that you powdered on the side of the leg that you pierced with the needle, if there is no other cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When beginning to mend the fracture on that day, and do not extend it, if you do not want to have an infection.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess occurs, you must stop the restoration of the fracture within three days, and do not return to the patient on the fourth day or later, because you will cause further harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is protruding above the knee joint, you must cover that with your hand and reduce it, cutting through the soft tissue with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not ready and the force of the blow is on the knee, you must reduce that with your hand and this tool; and this tool is made of iron, its length is seven or eight digits, and its latitude is according to the quantity of the swelling; and for this the doctor who takes those three or four according to the amount you indicate in the treatment in total species of fracture is necessary.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be reduced, and there should be little resistance from you so that you do not double the compression on that at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	When the pain is at its acute extremity and is marked in the outer parts; and it is the cause of the patient's great discomfort, and the entire body enters into distress.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of him:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called "labre volentz atelarem" in Greek, which is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because the end of his pain comes up high on the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And he presses it in a vein that returns the bone, and is engulfed by some adjustment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And he tries to engulf the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of his pain is subtle, and does not press on the sturment for good exception, you know that you have inserted the end of that bone inside that instrument has power to do this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bones of all that have been recommended, then insert them into that bone that comes from the incisions that have been made; or sharpen that bone with one of the razors in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And accordingly, look at that which is Roman in the bones and hardened muscles.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bones are reduced, and the pain in the thighs becomes extremely violent, you will know that the bones do not return to their natural position; and then do what you can to help the thighs.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed your restoration of the bone, and you immerse your hand in cold sterile water, and indeed if it is summer, and do not pause over the plague or any other cause, for which there is no need to add poisoning and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And administer steels at the time of the highest complement of the bone restoration, and leave the plague discovered that has been identified as having indented the truss am forfexs and used according to the quantity of the plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take all caution not to strain the plague on the fracture, that no motas are seen, and do not add poisoning or corruption to the thighs, which are mort or malautia, for it is unsanitary.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the second stricture were softer, it would be different from the softness of the other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the plague is large or bad, and you are afraid of those accidents that have changed them, and cause pain in the area, then you should not press on that part, less it causes more pain in the area where there are hard sheets in place of stones and tightens the cloth.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the plague begins to appear, if it is found in the cloth that was placed on that part, then you should remove the cloth that had been pressed over it and apply ointments, as we usually do for plagues, which are found in tetrafarmacon and resemble that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is convenient for you to remove the limb and consider the plague every day at night and in the evening when it is consolidated and closed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the incision runs from there to the parts away in ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If in the plague several days pass and it is not consolidated nor closed by the cloth, then you should know that here are small points of which you must inquire about the plague to prevent them.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	When those sacks are those that remain closed and extract, those that of them do not remain closed and press the member and cause pain, insert me in the second one that you can possibly insert.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you find in the plague of swelling or inflammation, it is similar to other forms of corruption and putrefaction, then you should know that there is a point where it is best to place your hand according to what is suitable for the cure of the one who preceded this narration in the upper part of the book.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from that in the quality that covers what I say and you make present your hand: when it becomes large, lean over the member as the eye and the helper do, and seem like those of the large members, and do not presume to attract or remove from it, nor the removal of it due to the occurrence of purulent matter for about twenty days or thirty; and you cure the plague if you see, and if not, lay down that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	When treating a swelling that occurs in the path of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This swelling occurs in the course of treatment for a fracture, and particularly when it affects the joints, and is worsened by the figure of the member; and moreover, it strongly prohibits the member from performing its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	It is then considered whether the swelling is recent and is being treated with those medicines that have anesthetized aloe, essential oils, and honey, and acne, and semblantz; in which case you should take some of those or all, and apply them to the wounds as they are stiptic, or albumen of honey, or agre, and then place those over the swelling, and bind them firmly with good constraint.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And the extraction should be made without delay if it does not yield in those days; and if it still does not yield after that, then continue to extract until the swelling is reduced; or strengthen over the layer of plum that has the property of remaining intact in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the stone has already passed through the urethra and is causing difficulty in urinating, and it is necessary to pass it, you should scrape the area with a sharp instrument, such as a curette, and insert it into the bladder; and treat it within the body where it is painful.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Regarding the restoration of fractures when they are restored and approached with Roman medicine, and the member does not follow the natural course, it is said:
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and the member subtle and free does not follow the natural course, it is said that this is due to various causes: among which is the multitude of solutions of the limbs and the luxation of the foot that does not follow its course; or for excessive stricture of the limbs due to the prohibition of nutrients to reach the member; or for excessive embrocation; or for movement that is not at its proper time; or for lack of sanction in the body of the mouth and delicacy of the.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The first source sentence translates to:
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a bandage on the member, so that the bandage draws nourishment from it or continues to cause inflammation of the skin, if that nourishment returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Capital. Twenty-second.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the treatment of the three-knuckled bones when they are restored incorrectly and prohibited from operating as they once did.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When one has returned to the member that was already treated for tortuosity and prominence of the three-knuckled bone, and it is for this reason that the member is deformed in form, but the member is not prohibited from natural operation, unless it is known that this member is of a different type of trinck.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	It has already been found that many surgeons and restaurators have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly feared by those who perform it, because the quality of the one who performs it is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodification are recent, it is likely that they are caused by water in the skin of the feet, which is softened by moisture, as the flesh of the legs is soft and mellow, and resembles those; and it should be made with the same plaster as the plaster for mollification, as it is said to be well made; or that it is a mixture of grease from the leg and gray oil or olive oil, and it is applied to that; or that they are fatty lumps and are tied with strings of femurs of the colon, and resemble those of medicines that are used for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	When certain women are dissolved by frequent rubbing of the skin that is moist and the member is moved in all parts at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If tortuosity has already become established and is hard and converted into stone and necessity arises for medical treatment of the iron, you should know that the pus is located under the skin and the continuance of the bone is dissolved, and it should be kept in mind that excess nodes of those metals in the bones are cut off with sharp knives, and there is facilitated assistance in that suffering and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	A speech on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of the thigh bone, which prohibits movement and causes the figure of the member to be distorted, and large pains and wounds come over the buttock.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an accident occurs in the case of dislocation, you should perforate as much as possible to reduce it, and do not delay in reducing it, for if it is delayed, the location becomes affected and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	When it is not desired that there be blood or swelling at the time of the castration, four ways are seen to come: four spasms and pains lead.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, it is necessary that you cut the thigh at the castration, and place your hand inside where the apostemacio pauses; and the member should be tied with wet tail and tail hair, and the part should be made easier.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all parts of the body are treated as this one, where the memorandum will come in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the capsules of displacement according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the chest that has been separated, go inside to the part that has been separated further.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of displacement of the jaw further.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the dislocated teeth do not come back; and the displacement of the teeth is caused by one of two ways: either they are loosened by little removal, and then softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and compressed, inside where they are mollified at the joint between the thigh and the saliva of the foot and they do not have to hold their mouth closed, and the tongue of the patient is enveloped in the fold.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of the joint is slight, it returns to its original position on its own for no apparent reason.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and comprehensive, it is necessary to administer a reduction of the joint as soon as possible, without delaying for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And is it that the physician holds the thigh of the patient, and inserts the thumb of the hand into the joint, taking care to push the jaw forward in one direction or the other, depending on whether it is a single or double dislocation; and commands the patient to close their mouth and release any force applied; and the physician then engages the mandible and extracts it as it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if the mandibles are found to be dislocated, administer a poultice of water and oil, and when it is slightly reduced, do not delay the reduction of the remaining mandibles, as they have been said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	When the patient returns and closes their mouth, and the wound of the leg is not chewed, then place your hand over those powders of scented wool, and make a point of beeswax and rose oil; and also make a point of making it easier to remove the stools.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on their back, and their head be between two ears, so that it does not cause any harm to the part downward or to the left; and do not force any cause; if the back is fastened with a leopard's collar, then when the pains become more intense and the mandibles are notched, you should know that it is proper.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if it is administered with ease, and you do not work on the edge of the mouth, but rather on the food, drink, and excretion, then if the mandible is notched and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not converted into their proper places, then you should use gentle movements that cause fevers and sweating, and much pain in the stomach of the patient, and much vomiting of pure choler.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you see that the pain is coming, you will know that it is gout; and the following days, watch well for which part of the body it affects.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reducing the displacement of the shoulder girdle and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder girdle is not dislocated from the latch of the hand by its continuous action on the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the wrong place, and that is declared by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of the one is to put the thigh over the right knee and extend the thigh bones.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And carefully mark the place with your hand with a strong marking, so that it returns to its original position.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And stop over that plaster and powder and stretch it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the end of that which is placed on the cushion is continuously in it, it is not dislocated at any time; you must reduce and hold it according to what has been said and according to what appears to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And stop over that plaster and powder and stretch it, and command the thigh to stick to the hollow and to return to its original position as soon as it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	This measure of treatment reduces the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the displacement of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not displaced unless by three ways, of which one is that it is displaced from the beginning of the thigh to the end.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is displaced at the beginning of the muscle, and this is made tight; and it is not displaced in the rear by the shoulder; and it is not displaced in the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is mostly displaced and deformed and stretched at the ends of the thigh, and more so in those where the bones are few, less so in those where the muscles are many; and it is more difficult to stretch them out.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And more often it happens to one man by percussion or by pressure, and the muscle of that man is affected with cautery, and this is why it is already displaced.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	When you are about to enter and assist the patient who is lying down, and you proceed with the cure.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It is known that the dislocation of the joint is indicated when it is found outside the parts opposite to each other. Therefore, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the surrounding muscle, and between the convexity of the muscle and the tendon that you press with your finger at the end of the muscle as if it were a horse's tail, and you cannot reduce the joint back to its original position for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you need to reduce or manipulate the joint, and you press with your finger at the end of the muscle as if it were a horse's tail, and do not hesitate.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is made with a slight reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of the joint is that the attendant raises the limb of the patient to the opposite parts; and places his hand on the end of the dislocated joint, and strengthens it in its original position, and the attendant raises the limb of the patient, and extends it therein; and places his hand on the end of the joint, and returns it gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If the pain does not return after the first application, and it was caused by dislocation, it may take several days for the ankle to heal and be properly managed with a poultice of aloe vera, fenugreek, and honey, applied several times a day.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the ankle should be placed on the patient's back and the tightness of the wait for wool that is between the levator and stricture is reduced, and the doctor should place the knee on the hip, raise the head of the muscle, and pull the ankle away from the parts already done, and another servant holds the ankle so that it does not cause any pain in the parts already done, until such time as it returns to its original position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you want to reduce the second part of this maneuver: and it is that you present a man who has been stretched for a long time, and is from the side of that leg, and enters the patient's knee the tightness of the ankle and raises the ankle above the parts that the ankle is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the ankle away from the parts already done on the side of the abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the thigh is lame, you should cover that which is causing it to hang down, so that it is as heavy as possible, in order that the dislocation may return as soon as possible.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And if it is reduced and the hand is left in the ground, a long stone with the head of it being like a skull, as hard as mortar but not big or thin, and placed next to the thigh of the patient; push that the hand is on the top of the stone's head, and the thigh is stationary according to the length of the stone, and extend the arm of the patient to the other side of the other part; and extend the body of the patient to the other part for strength, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the thigh by all the causes that have been said, then use this treatment: and you take a stone of the quantity which is in the length of two braces, and the width of which is four times, and the largest part of it is placed at the top of the sitting bone according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	When one should touch the head of the bed with a cloth to prevent the patient from falling off the bed.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then place your hand on the head of the bed, and extend your arm or your arm over the patient's shoulder, and see if the hand is visible to the assistant and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place your arm on a scale according to the latitude, and extend your hand to the sides, and the rest is suspended from the other side, so that the joint does not move as much.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the wound of the foot is completed according to your ability, and you notice that the hand holds the head with a piece of yarn; and then apply a plaster prepared with powdered soap and almond oil over all the muscle, as it is rotating, and then tighten the head more on the plaster, and the hand of the foot is anchored to the neck of the foot, and it is less, and not bad for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When the wound of the patient is closed and the member is comfortable, then it is appropriate to apply the remedy to the sick person.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if the wound is given more blood or exercise, and it does not become inflamed, then it is already cured.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that occurs in the patient or for another reason, then it is appropriate to apply cauterization with three points, according to what is said in the capital of cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if everything is done and the wound gradually heals, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over some days, and it does not close and cannot lift the arm to the parts above, then you know that the nerves of the patient, which are at the top of the muscle, have been injured or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will not remain in place for a long time.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is made, you need the chest and breast or the parts behind, reduction is made by compression and extension to the largest extent possible, within which it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When administered in that manner, and cared for as directed, it will heal the wound that is being treated.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If the injury becomes severe in the member and causes delay in movement, then use warm poultices made from boiled herbs that have been applied to relieve the pain and return to the original state of the primary member.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure for a dislocated thigh.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the thigh is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated at all parts, and particularly at the part nearest to the part behind, and the dislocation of the thigh is not avoided by you when you are tense or when you are relaxed, as long as any other part is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated thigh, you declare it clearly, that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch that the nearby muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover the joints, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible so that it comes to the acupuncture point, where if you can reach the acupuncture point, it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, and then not all of it will heal; and especially when it reaches the distant parts, where all other types of dislocations are caused by a lot of pain and warm poultices applied to that part.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When restoring the body, when it is possible to reduce, it is that the body of the patient should be extended as much as possible, and the arms should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are over the thighs and below him, and he punctures the joint with his fingers or with the tip of his thumb, entering it into its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is to the adjacent parts, then return as if you fold the body over itself, entering it with the thumb of your hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not comply with the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And if two ministers extend the arms, and hold that extension with those ministers so that it is not weakened by the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And if it is necessary to rotate the arms, then turn them completely, pushing that it unrolls doubled long over the body of the patient, or limb.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, use that ointment on it for so that those causes that help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; and then press the joint with a strong push when it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	When reducing the cover that is placed over that bandage which is sterilized and exfoliated with albumen of honey, and is extended over the stricture descent, and the arm is suspended from the collarbone, and is left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And if it is slid; and then, if the joint is formed in the right place, you slide the limb of the patient and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not tightened, you repeat the bandage and the limb of the patient, and leave it for several days after it is extended; then slide it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If the patient's gravity causes a reduction in the joint, and the disposition of the limb is in movement, you administer humidification in the bath and gentle friction, and compression, after it is freed; or you place over the reduced joint, so it is the fatty part of the body; and then slide the limb, and leave it on the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And keep that, and put it in the bath; and when you dry it, you gently rub the joint with temperature-adjusted friction, and repeat over the reduced one, which is rolling of movement, one way, and the other, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, stop on that wet and slippery cow blade and press down hard on it, and make some holes, cut through the wet part and reduce it to its proper size.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The treatment of shoulder dislocation is from the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the shoulder is dislocated, and its reduction is difficult, and it is faster in the reduction of other joints, but rather because of the speed of the reduction in the hour in which it is dislocated, whether it is in an asthenic or cautive state.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the joint of the shoulder of the chest on a table and extend the shoulder of that, and you press your hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and push it inside until it returns to its original location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	May well cover that if the palm has already been placed on the abdomen of the patient, then make the thigh pause over the two of the patient's thighs on a table for extension and reduction; and if dislocation precedes the two of the patient's thighs, then place the position of the patient's thigh on that intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand covers the imminence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	If the swelling returns so much, that is good; but if not, then tighten that part as much as possible, and do not stop until it stops, for if it does not stop, neither will it be able to reduce the pus that passes on those days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint pain follows its winding; and I do not notice any cause in the thigh, except that it is softened and cannot be strengthened by any cause; you should know that the nerves are divided or cut, and you do not engage in it unless it is stretched as much as possible with a cord and the force of the cauterization confirms some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the swelling returns, stop on the part that has been recommended, and let it be loosened and tightened for several days; and then gradually release and relax the muscle of the foot and exercise it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of the foot is left and happens to be severe, you should loosen that part as much as possible, and apply some oil to relieve any pain, and enter if necessary.
Capitol .xxix.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The translation of "De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz" is: "Of the cure of dislocation of the f
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	The translation of "Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida" is: "Some parts are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When a bone is dislocated from the thumb to the abdomen of the patient, if you hold it and push it back into its place, then return it.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the head of the dislocated bone, suspend the finger above the part where it is dislocated, and release it after two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend the finger and extend it when it is straight in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When you wake up, read that second part of the story, and do not slothfully slide it in the day and exercise it with movement, and hold it straight; and keep doing this for several days after it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem like this, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient, and hold it at that part and do the first surgical operation, and when it is healed, you will be cured.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, when you are dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital.xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the care of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When you encounter a complete dislocation of any vertebra of the back or neck, and if there are other vertebrae in those places, do not cure them in that place, for death will come to the abdomen.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	When it comes to the matter of gout, it is known that the excretion of the foot is expelled outside of one's will, and cannot be held back; and if one has watched this for a while, it softens the members of the body or the changes in the body or the two parts of the body, or one of those; or it becomes a vertebra of that place, wherever it is watched, and whatever is watched becomes the removal of those four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that has been adjusted to the back parts and is not causing any discomfort.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of the matter is that if the gout occurs due to purification, which is not treated in that part, then it is not cured nor healed in that part.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that part where there is pain due to caustication or percussion or seemingly from those, the ancients had many ways of treatment, which was not profitable; and you have been introduced to that of which too much was used from too much heat, due to the proximity of the exposed part, which I have exposed and formed with different instruments of that, as I showed you and applied to that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in the case of pain that occurs in the chest, there is no cure or treatment for it; and it seems that in that case, two lances are used.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, none is cured except the one that occurs in the two parts mentioned by me as you recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And if the thigh is extended over the face, covering almost the entire part, and it is extended further down the stomach to prevent the chest from being hurt.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And if a cushion is placed, it should be placed on the ground at the end of the thigh near the head of the patient, and another cushion should be placed on the other end of the thigh to hold the feet.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The doctor holds the cushion, and does not stop in the ditch; and another doctor holds the other side in that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And the doctor wraps around the thigh and presses the leash on the belly; and extends the end of the leash to the cushion that is needed for the head of the patient, and fastens it there; and stretches the other leash over the knees of the patient's legs, and adjusts all the leashes and fastens them on the other cushion that is needed for the feet of the patient.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the minister of the cushion extends the limb to the point of the foot, and there are no remaining problems with the two feet and limbs in which they are stuck, but rather it is not stopped by anything, then it should be done as they have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his hands over the spine for strength until it returns, or if he places them on one table, and adjusts the weight of the legs as they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, then one must take a table where the latitude or longitude is in the middle of three bars, and dig into the side of the table where they have said that the mast is located in the middle of the extremities of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And the doctor places the mast of the table over the spine, and the doctor places the legs on the other end, and stretches as soon as the spine is straight and returns to its original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the mast that is turned around the mast; and it should be placed on the ground because the mast of the mast is at the end of the two feet, the longitude of which is a hand's breadth, and the mast must be placed in the end of the foot with the other foot, and the longitude that is between one foot and the palm of the hand, and it has been made in each foot as it returns, and each part must be fixed on the ground because it is not injured.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When a person has a broken bone, it is important to clean and dress the wound as soon as possible to prevent infection. The first step is to clean the wound with soap and water, then apply a sterile bandage or gauze to cover the wound. It is also important to keep the affected area clean and dry to
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the end of the bone, there is a groove in which the bone is formed, and its length is approximately equal to the length of the palm of your hand. In the other two bones, it looks similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the ligaments that you have tied in the chest area in the truss that you need to wear on your head, and the ligaments that you have tied in the thighs in the wound that you need to wear on your feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then each wound should have a dressing that covers it, and the surgeon will remove the old dressing and replace it with a new one according to what has been said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the wound:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then the spine is returned to its place, and the area is covered with a bandage. You should cover the wound with a piece of gauze that is slightly larger than the size of the wound, and then secure it with tape. Over the gauze, you can apply a cold compress made of ice or a wet cloth, and place it over the area where the spine was injured.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	When you have found the cause of the pain that has been described, and use the appropriate nourishment subtly within the body.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If you find any signs of inflammation in the location at the end of the treatment, it is necessary to administer medications that nourish and lubricate the administration of the table for a long time, as has been recommended; and the medication has already been administered in that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	If there are any signs of imminent inflammation in the back of the spinal columns of both sides, and it is caused by that dislocation; and if those bones have already been injured for which this medicine is not effective, then you should take great care to prevent your death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxi. (This appears to be a page number or
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure for a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not always mean dislocation, and do not happen to those that happen to the other small removals and concavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And when the joint of the ankle is dislocated, it happens in four ways: either in the parts of the fingers, or in the parts of the toes, or in the parts of the nails, or in the parts behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	When you suspect that the thigh bone is dislocated from its proper place, and when you adjust the saddle of the healthy thigh against the sick one, it becomes long and the knee bends more than the healthy one, and the thigh cannot bend the knee as before, and the place where it should be pressed to apply cautery, because the end of the thigh bone has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The first source sentence translates to: The reason for the dislocation of that which causes an accident is in the parts that are opposite, because the accidents of this are against those.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When there is pain in the joint due to dislocation of the limb, and the swelling expands the surrounding muscles, but does not cause pain in the affected part, and if it perforates to go further and cannot be stopped on the surrounding parts; and the urine of the patient is retained and the urethra is blocked, and you must cover the limb with the ambulance over the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	When the part of the thigh that is dislocated expands the nail, and it does not double over the nail that doubles around it, and the camba of the thigh is shorter than the other, and the nail is mollified, then the end of the thigh is at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The first source sentence translates to: "The most effective reduction of the specimens in this dislocation is what you consider, doctor, if the dislocation is ancient and antiquated, which has already been anticipated with that administration of reduction of this and Roman second according to its disposition, doctor; and therefore, it does not seem that in that there is a true wonder.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	When the dislocation is recent in that area, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you should cut along the line that you saw the joint move and extend it to the parts of the fingers and thumbs, and also to the parts of the little finger and ring finger, and it will return if not requiring another treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If the dislocation does not return in this hand, then you should prepare for strong force and extend the camber of the thumb from there, or on the side that is most comfortable for you, or on the side that is visible over the camber; and extend the end of that camber as far as the tips of the fingers; and apply strong pressure on the root of the thigh, and hold another hand on the extremity of the limb.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is extension of the limb or of the finger to the angle of the elbow, or to the angle of the back of the hand.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it is extension of all those in a straight line when the thigh is raised and the side that is closest to the earth is hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This method of extension is specific to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If displacement returns as they say, then do so; otherwise, you will need everything possible to speak about the doctor's treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the joint parts, know that the thigh should be flexed over the knee; and place the limbs on the side of the thigh in the place where the head of the thigh meets the place where the knee is located; and extend the limb from the part of the shoulder to the other part of the girdle.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And if another minister forcefully takes the handles of it and makes the large opening of the patient's thigh wider and extends the parts around for a firm hold, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is used with less care than the others in which this member is reduced.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you are excused from me and do not obey the entry of this species of care for everything, know that the two feet of the thigh are often tied with a strong, thin limb over the ankles and over the knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part is according to the quantity of four fingers, and the thigh's girdle is extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	When the patient's thigh is suspended over the chin, and it is in the largest part; and the length of the thigh is the quantity of two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And order a young man to cut off the head of the thigh, and suspend it at the foot of another young man, and the other young man will cut off the thigh with strength, so that the joint returns to its original location quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction, when there is a dislocation at the end of the part, it is necessary that the thigh be placed over the pug according to what has been recommended in the case; and the limb should be tightened on the real hip and on the chest of the patient.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And if two thighs are placed, one on the foot of the patient, and the other on the head; and if the thighs are adjusted to the peg that is placed over which parts are humid, so that the thigh does not get stuck because the foot is between the thighs of the patient, so that you have to extend the parts further, it will not be torn.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And every physician extends to their part, and they place the cautery in their hand and perform the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If you follow the reduction, do it very carefully; and if not, stop gently and ask what they have said in the medical book about that tightening.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	I do not know what this means, as it does not follow the pattern of the previous translations. It may be a separate thought or a phrase that does not translate well into English.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation is in its place, it is important that the cushion is extended slightly, and follows this method according to the report; and the physician places the palm of their hand on the affected part, and the other hand on the other cushion, and the cushion stops the extension on the part that was dislocated.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is behind, it is not important that the cushion is extended to the parts in front, and it should be raised on the ground; if there is a hard cause, ask how the pain is felt when the thigh of the patient is dislocated in the wrong direction, according to what has been said about the joint of the thigh on two sides; and the cushion is on their face and the limbs are extended, according to what has been said, it has not hurt.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When it comes to administering compression, place the table over the location where you wish to apply the joint pain relief.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, when the reduction is complete - and the sign of reduction is not visible to you, and it is because you extend from the thighs, and when you see those knees and the thigh extends the chamber and expands that hole, then you know that the member that was reduced - and you adjust the thighs and stop pressing and extend a band that is not wide in any of the parts; and adhere the thigh to the supports for three days or for four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and compare one chamber to another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those knees in position, you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then let the thigh go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply that to your first stretch, and let it be expanded for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	If that is the case, and it should wait in bed for a few days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capital, Chapter 22.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated by three parts, namely the head, the neck, and the glenoid cavity. The head is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that the patient commands the thigh to apply its cushion to the buttock; you should know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the limbs of the shoulder is that you stretch the thigh to the buttock, if it can reach the extended knee; you should adhere the upper part of the thigh to the face of the patient, and place the foot of the patient between the thighs of the patient; and you should adhere the shoulder of the patient to your palms, and stretch those between the thighs of the patient over the shoulder of the patient for strength, and other ministers extend the knee if the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When it comes to the matter of the patient's labor, his or her girdle should hold tightly to the thigh, not causing any discomfort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And apply that and let the bandage adhere to the thigh, and apply those emplacements with a needle for three days or four, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the thigh's bandage for more than a few days, until it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the foot is successful, then administer extra care with those instruments used in the treatment of the previous injury.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle has some joints that can be reduced by small removal, and some have been dislocated secondarily, and the dislocation of the ankle is made or at the ends of the fingers or at the ends of the toes.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that sometimes the ankle becomes flattened at the place where it was dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of the reduction of the ankle is of little benefit, and it is that it is extended as much as possible within the limits and then returned.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When in the care of the patient when the leg is dislocated, take the thigh and hold it firmly in the part behind the other leg in the patient's lying position.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if you have the second leg straight and the foot of the affected foot in front of it, hold the left foot of the other foot in front of the affected foot's foot in the cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And pull the foot of the affected leg towards you and hold the left hand with your right, and extend the left arm; and push the chest of the affected leg with the other hand.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make the necessary movements according to what has been counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And push the chest with the other hand towards the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then if you return in one direction or two according to this manual, and if you see the foot has come out, stop; and otherwise continue the operation, making that return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are not allowed to reduce the leg as advised, place the thigh on the table over the ground, and stretch a rope on the ground that fits between the patient's thighs, and you have already covered the leg with a cloth so that the leg does not come out of the cavity.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	When the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot over the patient's most or the limb that lies on the collar of the foot; and extends that same minister against the extension of the bed part, and the pillow is placed between the patient's thighs retained by it, so that this part of the bed does not extend beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	When the mason dislocates the joint with the healthier leg, and another servant holds the thigh firmly in its place, so that the dislocation returns to ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	When the dislocation returns and is declared to you as the health of the reduction, pause plastering and extend that part firmly, and tie the foot to the cushion.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And remember that you do not fear or protect the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the limb over that does not become strong and leads to strength.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And hold it for two days or three; and if the limb becomes soft, extend that part.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	When the swelling on that part appears on the third or fourth day, and forbids the patient from walking for fourteen days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is not safe to walk in that space, then it is not certain that the dislocation is not over the dissolved and corrupted part, and therefore it does not receive care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs in that place, you should cover the wound with the urine of the aquatic animal we mentioned earlier, in another place of care and dressing, if it is useful.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capital. xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the care of the dislocation of the three parts of the foot.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cover that the one who is dislocated should be cut with little extension of its parts; and that is not difficult, it is enough to make a small cut.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the two nails of the foot, you should cover that you make a cut on the skin or table, and it should be done as if it were not there.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And if you are in the foot, and place your hand on that part where the joints are, and then heat it with something that is not hot, and after you remove it, and see that it is cut and does not appear in the most prominent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then, pause the belly of the foot of the patient on a table that grabs the entire foot, which has two cups, and press it gently and firmly for three days; and then remove it and make it heal through ambulation for three days, until it is stretched and reduced in size.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitulare .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the special causes of displacement that are caused by pain or fracture or other injuries.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occurs, and you take care of the patient's cure and restoration, successful results are often seen in life.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore, it is not presumed that the cure of the patient depends solely on long practice, mercy, and compassion, but rather on the art, which is gradual, not arrogant or presumptuous; and it should be used at the beginning of medicine, not only for those who are in despair, but also for the alleviation of pain, and in which there is some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then you should make every effort to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, since it will eventually lead to gout.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the member returns shortly after you want it, administer the regimen that reduces gout and cures the plague, as is appropriate for the patient's condition.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is mistaken for fracture and occurs in the separated bones of the pelvis, you should pierce the statement of those, and make sure that they have said in the simple ailments of this that it is preceded in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid afterwards that of the intramission in the ways of fear, following that it precedes my preaching; four this is better for you to have the true Creator, and less permanent for your glory, and less salutations to the one who sees those in their time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	I hope these paragraphs of Albucasim are perfectly understood by God.
Amen.	Amen.
