Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vous complèt aquest livre, le qual est le développement de la science de la médecine, pour le compliment du seigneur, et pour les exemples, et pour les déclarations, je suis convaincu que vous avez compris ceci à vous, ce qui est partie de l'opération am ma, soit la chirurgie.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The first source sentence translates to: "However, the operation is laid out in our region and time, as much as possible in private, because of the great importance of the science of it, and the witness of it remains; and I do not add any small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been lost due to error and neglect, since they are the foundation of our understanding and the extension of our knowledge.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	It is observed that you are alive in this order of this treatise on the second way of exposure and declaration, and for the reason that you will come into the forms of the tools of cauterization and of other instruments of the work as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of the same, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause for which the artisan is not able to make the art in the past, but in this present time, it is because the art of medicine is long and that covers the actor so as to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Guillaume entered when he knew the properties of the members and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and tendons, and the number of each, and the nature of their essence, and the pulsating and quiet veins, and the locations of the inflammations of their essence.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	For that reason, Yocantos says that I, who have the name, is not much in the work, but mainly in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have not yet said that in the beginning of this book; for what we have not learned about anatomy, it is not clear that it leads to the death of men, as you have seen many examples of this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You have seen a doctor and a patient who had an incision of an abscess in the groin, and made some arteries in the groin so that the blood flows greatly in that part when the woman died between the hands of the doctors.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	When I saw another doctor who thought that the man's throat was swollen due to his state, and the throat was large, and it came to him and was dry at the other end of the water, so that this man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already called for help to remove that, and I saw that because of the large size of the throat and the position of the thighs under it that would kill him.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	I saw another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a black castrated male that was the fracture in the thigh of him; and the doctor, being ignorant, treated the fracture, over the plague, with pillows and esthers of strong structure, and did not let the plague expire.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And it slipped according to the wishes of the doctors, and according to the relief, and according to the pain that was felt for many days and commanded that we loosen the limb; and I saw that the thigh and the foot were apart, and it came to loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	When you call upon it and appear to gently slide the limb, and eventually achieve calm and relief from those pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, I already confirmed that the corruption had spread to the member, so I could not stop it and had to continue walking around the member until the corruption in the thigh passed through the bad foot.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	I saw another doctor who performed an appendectomy and left ulcers on some days, and the cunning of the lady's husband was revealed.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cramp is purely due to melancholic humor, and it does not come from the husband's iron, but rather it is in the member where you suffered that of all has been hostile.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	Therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation on me be done in two parts: one part is in the operation associated with health, and the other part is in the work done in the larger plans.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in this place of this free land where operations are performed in which errors and fears occur; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard this and lay that, so that the girls do not fall into speaking and to you untruthfully.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	When you prepare your weapons for the concern and protection of God, and your wounds are open and closed.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	When you use the best way according to God's grace for salvation and praise, and heal the most difficult wounds with difficult surgery, and return your weapons to this that frightens you, so that your faith and your name do not escape: four more remain for your glory, and put on in the world and in later times for your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Glory has already been given in some monasteries:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat wounds with unclean hands, for impure hands do not give birth to healthy children.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already had to pay this free book three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	The division of the free book begins, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered from the head down to the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the ways of the cauteries, and that which is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second source sentence to translate:
Divisio de la tersa partida.	This line appears to be a medical term or phrase, possibly referring to a division or separation of some kind in the context
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	This line seems to be discussing the third part, which is related to restoration and dislocation, as well as the curing of twisted or distorted parts. The order of this part is from the head down to the feet, and it involves the shapes of various instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	This line appears to be discussing the use of cauterization, which is a medical practice involving the application of heat or pressure to stop bleeding or cause contraction of tissues. It also mentions that this method is used in acute medic
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	This line seems to be introducing a new section or chapter of the medical treatise, which will cover all aspects of the subject matter. The phrase "le tract
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	This line appears to be asking about the quality of the wounds caused by cauterization and the instructions for using it, as well as the circumstances under which it is prohibited. The term "noccumentz" may be a misspelling or archaic term for "instructions" or "guidelines.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	This line seems to be explaining that the speech about the quality of cauterization wounds and their instructions is long and detailed, and requires knowledge and secrecy. It has been spoken by many wise people, but some have disagreed with it, and for me, a short summary is sufficient. I am afraid of a long explanation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	I say that cauteries comfort the entire body universally, which is its matter or the matter of its parts, except for two compositions, which are composed of the matter of its parts.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of a dried and decaying tail and body; four others said that cauterization is beneficial for that, and the others said the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable in diseases where it is lacking in quality and dryness, because nature of the fire is lacking in quality and dryness, and it is not appropriate that a dry tail and body be cauterized when they are dried and sec.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And if you disagree with those who say the opposite, that cauterization is beneficial for all dried and dry tail and body that is seen in the bodies of men, then when you compare the bodies of men and their humidity to the entire focus, the bodies of men will suffer.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And you say according to that speech, that this has been experimented with me already by many doctors.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not believe that this will come over time, that which has already been exproved and exercised in the capital of cauterization for the exercise of the same, and known the diversity of the bodies of men and the disposition of their diseases in their members, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, there is no cause for fear, and particularly in wet and filthy diseases, such as gout and rheumatism, all doctors are accustomed to perform this procedure without hesitation in those cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	It is wise, lads, that the secret of healing by cauterization and the goodness of medicine are understood, for it is then that the focus is simple, the application of which does not reach the other member except the one being cauterized and does not cause any harm to the rest.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Less often does the application of hot medicine reach the other member except the one being cauterized, and more frequently it comes to the member of difficult cure and more frequently it is heard.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Less often does the focus, due to its sublimity and goodness of substances, not work unless it is superfluous. And we have known this by experience and long practice in the art of knowing the true causes; and for this reason you are excused from the length of the sermon and if not, it is not due to my free will in this moment to share my secret with the focus, and the quality of the operation of the focus in the chest and the expulsion by which you expel the diseases, philosophical demostratiu is proven, which is sharp in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	When wise men, sons, find that it is not convenient to perform cauterization at the time that is most suitable for the first time, they should wait until a more appropriate time.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is convenient in all times, because the damage caused by time is submerged in the joy that the cauterization brings, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or painful necessities, fast and finish it, which do not suffer delay due to the fact that those that come later are more than those that have passed, which is greater than less.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And you say that there is no need in your pessas, or sons, to estimate only the common people and the humble, so that when that malady that is cured by cauterization is not recovered entirely at all times, and is left with that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not that they are afraid because of this, that cauterization is not only in place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humidities which are the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cauterization is superfluous over medicine because of the request of its virtue and excellence of its operation and greatness of the Lord's servant.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, according to the composition of the illness and its location in the body, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the heart of the patient from the addition of superfluities in the body, and that which has reached the patient through the acquisition of similar causes; but if the illness that is administered cauterization is an illness of a subtle member with few superfluities and humors, then as cauterization of the tooth for pain and similarity to that, it is possible that in it there will be no return of that pain, only that it becomes smaller.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	It is said that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and it is called a false speech, not because I understand it in this, but because I believe that healing does not come from medicine or another cause, as I have heard.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	But the cause is the opposite of that; and I understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is not only when they administer the means of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and it is in the end of the cause that they administer cauterization to him, and he benefits from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	When it comes to the use of cauterization in medicine, it is not understood by everyone and many doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	It is said that copper is better than iron for cauterization, and this has not been understood until now because of the equality of copper and its superior substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	It is said that the place for cauterization does not burn, as it is not absolutely true, but you have already proven and experienced that this is not done only in one part of the body, and copper cauterization is better than iron as they have said; however, when you do cauterization with gold, you do not declare it, because it depends on the quantity you want for the hardness of gold, and you prepare the recipient for receiving the flesh; and if you adjust over it, the gold may burn in the fire, and there may be some layers for the craftsman to occupy that part.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Therefore, iron cauterization should be made with light pressure and evenly along the operation line.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	You have already ordered this chapter in the cauterization according to the following chapters, and you have ordered those of the foot within the feet, so that the patient can ask for it that he wants of it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Cauterization for head pain due to coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization causes humidity and coldness on the accident part of which it causes symptoms, causing constipation and multitude of rheumatic fluxes, called gout, from the head to the parts of the eyebrows and hair, and multitude of sleeping, and pain in the teeth and guinea pig, and universally in all maladies that appear due to coldness, as if paralyzed, soda, and apoplexy, and it seems in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this, that first commands the patient that the head be evacuated by civil medicine, three or four times, according to what is asked by the virtue of the body and the age of it and its habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	When it is necessary to shave the patient's body, and when the razor has caused cuts on their skin, place the patient's legs over a low chair and hold their hands over their chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And place your palm on the tip of the razor, pressing down on the razor's handle between the patient's nostrils.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, as the said place has been mentioned, try to press that spot with the cautery, and use olive oil of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And place it over the spot that has been mentioned, with your hand on the opposite side, using the one that is not tied, and rotate it slightly at a time.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And take your lighter and look at the spot, and if you see any amount of bone exposed, as much as the amount of errors, then raise your hand, and if it is not frozen, use another one, if it is cold, then enter as soon as you can see the bone that I have told you to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the spot and rub it in three minutes.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And place your hand over the edge of the burning cotton that is being sewn, and cover it with that which has been destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And care for the area with an antimicrobial solution that enters when it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it has been said that when the Roman plague pierces the chest, much milk flows from the breast, which is better and more helpful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they advised them that the cord is cauterized within the bone, and it is held by the cauterization while any part of the spine is touched.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And if it is said that it clings to the bone, and if it is cared for.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they advised others that the cauterization goes through the skin, when it presses on the strong bone within which the bone is broken, and this is the form of alphecati small:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate that those vapors from the head will escape from that place.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if it is held for a long time and is cured when it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	When I have not seen these special kinds of cauterizations before, it is usually in the fear of another man's second visit; and then, if you do that, it is better for your health when you can, as soon as possible, open the head because of the continuity of the joint as it has been reported in other members, and especially when the head of the thigh is of natural flesh.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cauterization is less safe and better for your health; and that is why I recommend it to you. And that work is better for your health.
Capitol segon.	Second, the second type of cauterization is...
Del cauteri del cap.	...of the head cauterization...
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, and it is prolonged in the thigh, and one uses irons, nails, and purgatives, emplausters, gauzes, bandages, and clamps, and especially if it has already been cauterized by a cautery that does not profit from its own cause, then you should consider that if the head of the thigh is of strong origin in its nature; and if it is not thin and shrivelled, then you should cauterize with another cauterization later on.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the coda and expose the bone to determine the quantity that has been received and cauterize that part of the head at the location called the Vas, — and that location is where a gentle breeze is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And then close the wound, and do not discover the bone, for the thigh does not suffer as much pain as the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you declare this cauterization in that place, where it is said that this cauterization is on the head and the occipitus is placed under a subtle cauterization that is made on the same location of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	End of chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of ancient non-classical cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain in the head becomes severe, or if pain occurs in the wrist, it is necessary to remove the head from the head, and administer medicine to the other curacy, which you have mentioned in the causes of diseases; and do not profit from it, cauterization can be made in two ways: either with an acute medical cauterization or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	When using cauterization in medicine, it is important to take a sharp piece of lead, and carefully cut the extremities of the affected limbs.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then, use a sharp needle to pierce the area of pain in the thigh, entering through one spot and exiting through another, if it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then, bind the affected part with a bandage, and leave it for three hours; then remove the plaster and reapply it twice or three times a day, and return to examine the submerged part every few days to see if the location is healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And when the affected part is cured, remove the bandage.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see, use some of the recommended cauteries listed in the book on burns that I have written.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cauterization method I use is as follows: this is the form of the instrument.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called the clasp claviers, where the head of the instrument resembles a thistle with a curve, and in the middle part of the instrument there is a small indentation.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And put your hand over the painful location, and pull back your own belly - so as not to rupture the intestine that is sticking out - and gradually roll the small iron over quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the quantity of blood that is discharged through the specific part of the rib is less than what the patient can bear, and you lift it up to prevent the artery from being overburdened, so that no flux of blood occurs, then...
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And after that, apply a poultice of salt water to the affected area and leave it there for three days; and after three days, remove the poultice and take care of the wound as it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you see, burn the end of the intestine with cauterization, and keep an eye on the artery in this place, which is not antiquated.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of antiquated intestinal embryo.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure the intestinal embryo as directed in the previous treatment, and as has been said in the divisions of the diseases, and do not take advantage of the cure, and sometimes for the disease that does not suffice what has been said in the first cauterization in medicine or in the cauterization with fire, you should light the cauterization cuticle over the area where the pain is located, or that one; and then rest your hand for a while and stretch it over the incision of the artery and pervene through the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is harmed by chewing, and that the lizard does not become twisted and the nerves that cause that, and that it does not become distended.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that bursts, then in the abscess of it there is fear, and especially to that one who does not know what causes it and does not study or explore; and leave the operation on it at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And when you come to remember the regimen of the flow of blood accident of the artery according to the second hand, in the place of this free location.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you see of this malady that does not satisfy this cautery and sees the heart of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as they have encountered, and care for the wound after it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, maintain the cautery that has been said in the capital of stretching of the artery with an cautery with two points, and this cauterization is better and less confers.
Capitol .v.	Capital.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of the pain of gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the gout there is pain by cold and it is cured of the causes that are lactic and of the other cure that I have said in the division, and it is not relieved of the pain, then you ignorantly use the cautery, and this is the one that has the name point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When a point is made on the earlobe, and it is placed around the entire circumference of the ear as it rotates, or in the circuit of any similar object where pain is experienced, it is customarily used to relieve pain.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Place the cautery on the earlobe as many times as necessary to draw out enough blood to reach the desired location.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If the cautery is made on multiple points of the earlobe and it heals, then care should be taken to avoid injury to the surrounding areas.
Capitol .vi.	This is a continuation of the previous sentence, but it seems to be
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cautery for burns.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Burns that are cured and treated with cautery are not the same as those caused by specific substances that are ingested through the mouth, according to what has been said in the divisions of the diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for substances that are ingested for the sake of satiation or to relax the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure the burn, use gauze and stitches, and do not comfort yourself with your cure. Instead, you need to cauterize the thigh three times: the first time on the earlobe, the second time a small piece of cloth is placed there to hold it in place, and the third time on the joint of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When you pause the cautery for the opposite side of the affected part, four mollifications will not be seen in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize the part with the cautery at the right end of the swollen nose, a little above the corner of the chin, and on the other side, the longest of which is equal to the length of the first, and then stop your hand when it is burned by the amount of fat in the specific area of the collar.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of cauterization, and it is special for the barber, the form of which is drawn on a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, that part is rather subtle and has fewer hairs; and it covers a little of the excessive greasiness with a few.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And apply the remedy to the place as it is processed when it is healthy.
Capitol .vii.	Capitulum vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy occurs and is treated as follows and does not confirm your medication and the patient has no fever, you should cauterize that part four times: on all the corners of the patient's head; and cauterize and the meat of the head as they have said; and cauterize in the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The hand of the cautery is made according to how it is described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	When the mouth of the stomach has already been burned; and it does not hurt more; and then I apply my hand to this wound that you are treating.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization for the relief of pain by inflammation.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover them with large and small pills, so that they may be swallowed.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then scrape the entire surface of the wound and place it on the clean part of the described cream in the chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place that some leaves, as that is the hand of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And then do as I have said before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if for those who are healing, do as I have said before; and if not, then make three cauterizations on the same side of your head, which are coming from the nasal root to the nasal root of the opposite side.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cauterization the largest part of that, and then care for the cauterization as I have said before.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I will try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into English.
Capitol .ix.	I apologize, but the provided text does not contain a clear
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	This line translates to: "Of cauterization of parasites and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you process in the head's reshaping and as they have said; and remove the head of the thigh, and cauterize that with cauterization in the middle location of the head, and cauterize over all the corners of the head, and cauterize over the opposite side part of it, and three times cauterize over the spine of the collarbone.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the thigh for the head to be softened and the thighs tolerant and the head is strong, then you cauterize that with four cauterizations over the spine of the back, and sometimes with cauterization within which is hurt by the knee cap of the leg, and lift the other leg.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And treat that if it is cured, and this is olive oil cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized the epileptic except that epilepsy is by strangulation.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And you know that you reshape the head of the patient at the beginning of the year and at another time of treatment, as they have said in the division when the thigh is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	If the child who did not respond to the medications is given guarantor and stimulants, the servant will improve the state of the patient in a few days, bringing good results for the vindictive ones.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then, if you have already cut the edge of the thigh, and if you have cauterized it with a cautery in the previous location of the thigh, and if another cautery is made on the occipit, and if each corner of the head is cauterized, then...
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the patient is strong and tolerant, you can cauterize those which I have mentioned, causing almost complete and softening of the heart over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if the cautery is olive-colored, as previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is child, you should stop the fine cautery according to this servant.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. This is a date or a section number in the
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are humid and corrupted and very large, you can cauterize those which I have mentioned, causing almost complete.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If the cause of melancholy is superfluity, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him this remedy that purifies the brain according to what preceded in division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And cut the head of the wound, and make a clean cut around it nicely on the circle, and then pull that into the small hole in the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the wound is sixty centimeters long, and it is held tightly from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and it is worthy of being bordered with sheep's gut.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire for a while, the amount of heat that the patient endures when they are in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the small hole in the head of the patient, and let it go inside so that it is warmed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And apply one wash to the wound once a week, or another remedy inside when it is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize those small points afterwards, unless you have the means of an ordered cauterist: this is a specific of cauterization that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then stop that hair from being soaked in butter or in grease.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	When it comes to the application of cauterization with urine, it descends into the wound.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are declared the beginning of urine in the wound by the servants that I have told in the division, you start and give to the foot a cut on the thigh so that it moistens the head of the urine, and keep it for all the humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And keep that moist in water for a while.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command that the one who raises the head to drink, and cauterizes that with the pointed cautery in the middle of the forehead; and if it is the beginning of gout in two wounds, or on one latch if it begins from the urine in one wound, then cauterize both points on two templates.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that you see coming out of the abdomen; and those points are in the longitudinal direction of the templates.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep the fluxes of sanction when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of sanction, stay the point at any medicine, which is possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	When you come to know that it is extracted from arteries and abscesses and caution of the flow of blood, it is known as an embolism.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some doctors are cauterized in the neck, two bones are cut off at the cauterization points.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of ancient tear cauterization.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When ancient tears are already known and by the veins and arteries that are in the location of the head deformed and it is verified that there are superfluous fleshy flaps, they are cauterized at that point with cauterization legs as those have been found in the beginning of water in the eyes, and they are cauterized in the middle of the head and two cauterizations are made on the neck at the two temples, and two cauterizations are made on the neck at the two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add, you cauterize that on the entire length of the eyelid over the tip of the small cauterization.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	The first line of the text translates to "Of cauterization of nasal odor." This appears to be a medical procedure or
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate that patient who has been told in the division and does not profit from your medication, then appear and give to the thighs of the patient three nails; and then cut the head of him, and cauterize the am cauteri with a sharper am cauteri olivar.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And if you have not already done so, you should cut the hair on both sides of the foot, and then make a small incision on each side. Then, using the pointed cautery, cauterize the two points that you have made.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn the arch of your foot.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the method for making a cauterization point.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization for the softening of the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by poor hygiene or moisture, you should cauterize that eyelid with a pointed cautery. This is the method for doing so:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 If you wish, cauterize it on both sides of the arch with a small incision on each side, and make them elongated in their entirety.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cauterization point should be according to the number of curls.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard on your finger with the cautery, but according to the amount that the part of the eyelid is swollen.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When using cauterization on the eyelid of the mouse when the whiskers are converted into parts of the hand and finger, the mouse.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the whiskers of the mouse are converted into parts of the hand and finger, cauterization is performed on the second and third fingers, either by fire or by medical means.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If cauterization is done with fire, order the patient to look at their whiskers as they are now, and if they are prolonged and elongated; and if the finger is that one you must stretch the edges of the mouse with a needle so that it does not hurt when those whiskers are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are prolonged and elongated, place the head of the patient in the first position, and place your hand over the eyelid of the mouse's whiskers, which is followed by the figure of a coffin, and is the beginning of the cauterization of the whiskers.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a cloth on the hair or in a mixture of wool over the eyelid of the mouse's whiskers.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And properly use the cautery of which this is the form of it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	When cauterizing over the figure that has been burned, gradually, in small circles, until the surface of the cloth that is hanging down like a curtain is completely charred, it appears to be perfectly done.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health of the second operation is that you see the eyelid of the horse being pulled back and the eyes being raised, you must make a puncture in the horse's eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And raise your hand and leave it there for three turns, and then place your hand over the area to prevent the skin from being burned.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And cure that part as soon as it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the eyes return to their place for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do another cauterization on that part as it was done in the first place.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the eyelids are in the eyelid, then do another cauterization on that part when it is raised in its natural place and is stretched and does not pull the horse's hair.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	If the cauterization in medicine is this that you command to the horse when the eyelids are stretched and pulled, and it is made of paper in the form of a curtain like a mirror, then it is done.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take a piece of cloth and a live coal and put it on the patient's back. And I, or whoever is doing this, and mix those causes with it, and make sure that it is not cold; and then expand that over the paper that is made in the shape of a thorn of a hedgehog, and place it on the other hand; and place the other hand on the edge of the album, and the head of the patient should be in the upper part.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	Then place the medicine on the patient's back and press it gently so that the patient does not feel the burning sensation of the medicine, as the burning sensation is due to the heat.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then, when the burning sensation subsides, remove the medicine and wash your hands with water; then consider if the eyelid has been cleaned as it is washed with hot or cold water, as that is what should be; and if not, return the medicine to the location where it was not previously applied and did not damage the operation and was not contradicted by the huel.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And a proper pause is made over the area where the coden of the adhesive is to be eradicated, and appropriate care is given to it so that it may become sound or healthy within the area where it is to be healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, you must perform your operation with diligence that does not fall short in medicine, and if the eyelid becomes softened and any cause of the pimples appears on the skin, you must repeat your medicine over that location where the eyelid is softened, and proceed as you began, and return it to its original state when it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of fuelha for the mirror.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the sizes of men vary according to their height and width, and therefore the size of your contraction is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not doubt that the way to rectification is to that to which you are studying in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimial of the skin.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating an ulcer called gout that has been mentioned in the divisions of the diseases and does not confirm your treatment, then you should cauterize this finger: command the patient to place their head on their chest, and hold their head between their hands in such a way that it is not painful or agitated for the patient's head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then pause cutting in edema in the album of gout or in the inflammation of the skin over the wound of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then identify the cauterization that this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	that is concave, how it is like a cane or a pen of the opposite side, from one end to the other, where the cauterization is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to see how it is, try.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is concave is better than the second work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the ulcer if it is opened, and remove from it the dried and scorched part.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not opened, you open it and extract the wound of the patient.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then stop over the patient with the cautery that is not yet lit, and take a little of the cautery from the heel to the tip, so that your finger does not hurt and the wound does not bleed, and then stop the cautery at the gray part of the heel and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the beginning of the cauterization enters the bone, it is; and otherwise, you repeat the cauterization once or twice, if necessary; and leave it there for three days, and then stop over it with a border and engage it to dry inside so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been three days and it is not healthy, you stop over the acute, corrosive medicine inside when the bone is discovered and is rough second to what is needed in the capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing the fistula, which was used at first: go to the location of the fistula and find it and stop in that subtle fissure; and put in that the quantity of one unc of funded plumb; and take your finger and have good retention of the plumb, and do not make the patient uncomfortable, and do not hurt the wound because the plumb does not reach the heel of that; and cover that with the heel of the patient's hand in album or in water, four plums adhere to the location of the fistula and heal it for the meravilhora cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is cured, then so be it that they have said about cauterization and cure; and if not, then you must administer snuff through the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its location in their place.
Capitol .xviii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language I can understand or translate. Could you please provide the text in a language I can assist
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	The translated sentence from the provided medieval medical treatise is: "Wounds that have already opened fissures in the lips, and most particularly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	The translated sentence from the provided medieval medical treatise is: "Therefore, how do you cure those fissures as they have been told in the divisions and not to profit your cure, if you do not know the cauterization small cautery according to this form which is made:.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	The translated sentence from the provided medieval medical treatise is: "And it is the cavity of the fissure according to the subtlety of the cotella.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	The translated sentence from the provided medieval medical treatise is: "Then pause the init immediately in those fissures when that cauterization comes to the edge of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	The translated sentence from the provided medieval medical treatise is: "And then cure that as soon as it is healthy.
Capitol .xix.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language I can
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	The translated sentence from the provided medieval medical treatise is: "Of cauterization of fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When inflammation occurs in the back of the throat, or palate, or gums and the tooth aches, and it swells, and becomes purulent, and a fistula forms, and you treat that and do not overcharge for the cure, then you cover the fistula with your hand and ignite it according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and put the burning end in the opening of the fistula, and you enter with your hand if the hot end reaches the root of the tooth and the gum, and then make a slit or two; and you treat that as they have told us about the cure when it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the abscess is healed and it is cured, then it is; and otherwise, you must discover the place and open the bones according to what will be found in their head.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterization of the teeth and mollification of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are sharp, and they are treated with medicines and not confessed, then you put the tip of the thigh on the patient's mouth, and ignite the cauterization in the form that will be most suitable, as if you pause the tooth over the gum and enter it with the burning end of the cauterization firmly, and you take hold of it with a little hand that the thigh is centered on the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	When you lift your dress, and then make points on the skin according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should drink water of salted sea and hold it for an hour, and they may see that the tooth is fixed and the gum is strengthened and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Capstone 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or in it is frozen, or vermin, or the patient does not respond to medical treatment, then you should cauterize on that with two hands: either with the cauterizing iron of cowhide, or with the cauterizing iron of fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing with cowhide is that you take the hide of the cow and heat it in a furnace, and then cut it and wrap it around the end of the thumb, and then press it on the tooth painful part firmly until it is warm.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then make points on that according to what the heat of the fire reaches in the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you see, submerge wool or hair in the border of that place, and put it on the painful tooth, and put it on the ignited iron that comes to the top of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cauterization is done because of the hardness of the iron and its acuity, and it does not reach the inside of the thigh and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then ignite the cauterization in the form that will be, and put it on the tooth and put your hand inside to see if the cauterization is hot; and make some checks to see if the pain remains or in that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cover that cauterization so that the patient does not open the mouth wide and holds it for an hour and removes it, and this is the form of cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as you see fit according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	The text you provided is not in the language of Latin, Italian,
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	De cauterizacio de extrophulos is a medieval medical term that refers to the procedure of cauter
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophulos are of flaccid and humorous nature and do not obey digestive medicines, and you see that the digestive is only slightly affected, then you know that this cauterization will work in the way that it follows, with two extremities to hold the fire, so that the smoke does not reach the other extremity, and then put the ignited part on the wound, and another if necessary, and enter when it comes to the wound's edge.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the fever is not severe, stop the cauterization according to the amount of fever, and after three hours, lay on your side and press on the affected area as much as possible to alleviate the pain.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And properly care for that wound and try to dry it within what is healthy.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or cautery is like this.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of gonorrhea and constriction of the urethra.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When cold humors reach the lung's anus, and especially when there is great coldness of the composition, it is necessary to make the patient evacuate the intestine at the beginning of medicines with laxatives, and then cauterize that point in the location where it is inflamed.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And remember that you will not arrive at the cauterization of the gallbladder nor burn the colon of the patient except for a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And if you cauterize that point, you must also make a point on the joint of the knee in the corresponding spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The first line of the source sentence is "E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent." This can be translated as "And the cauterization of the area should
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	E aprop care for that one which is previously entered, if it is cured." This can be translated as "And pay special attention to that which was previously entered, and treat it if it has been cured.
Capitol .xxiiii.	This line seems to be a reference or a heading, but without more context, it's
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cauterization of the lung disease and cough." This can be translated as "Regarding the cauterization of lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When the cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors, and the patient does not have fever or chills, and it is an old lung disease, then cauterize that area with two cauterizations on the shoulder in the locations that are already affected by lethargy and weakness; and another cauterization on the chest between two milks; and let the cauterization be clavilh according to the previous form." This can be translated as: "When the cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors, and the patient does not have fever or chills, and it is an old lung disease, then cauterize that area with two cauterizations on the shoulder in the locations that are already affected by lethargy and weakness; and another cauterization on the chest between two milks; and let the cauterization be clavilh according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, your cauterization should be done with points on the cautery that is called a point, which precedes in the pain of gout.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And the points should be made within the flesh for those; and properly care for that which is preceded by what is within for it to be cured.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery has three rails for cauterization, which can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Capital. XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization of the helper's head.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to wet lubricants and does not stop at the time of returning, and by a small movement is returned to where it was, as has been testified, those who first reduced the dislocation caused less pain, and the thigh is turned over the sitting bone or over the lap; and then lift the girdle that is in the part of the thigh where the joint is dislocated, if the joint is dislocated in the part of the belly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to use cauterization with two covers; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	When it is necessary to burn the cord that penetrates into the other part of the joint; and you will find the figure of burning, which has four caps burned.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And that is according to the number of attempts; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	 Some points are adjusted according to this count and because they are the burns.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place your hand over the burn and make it stick well, and the patient's leg should not be hurt for any time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in parts and tart, then you burn it as follows: you burn over the muscle that is to be burned, either at the clavicle or at the points of the joint, four times, confirming the joint, reducing humidity, and healing the leg.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of burning the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is inflammation in the stomach and humidity enters that part of the body, and if you continue the treatment and do not confirm it, then you should know that the leg is over the left side of the belly, and extend your hands and feet, and burn that three times as follows: one burn at the point of the joint, and two burns at the two costals of the burn, when the figure of the burn is triangular; and elongate those that are not adjusted to make a slit.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of the two thirds of the length of the coccyx.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the figure of the cauterization is this form, and if you want, cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cauterization according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	If the stomach is to be cauterized at the point where it causes fear: and you should make points on the stomach according to the quantity you wish, and then cauterize that part with the cautery; and afterwards, treat that part with the curing that has been previously prepared within the stomach.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the patient's thigh.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When in the patient's thigh there is pain due to coldness or wetness or large ventosity within which the part has become swollen by excessive excretion, and the thigh is treated with the remedy that has been prescribed and does not alleviate the pain, then you should make sure that the thigh is well rolled over the cervix, and you should make three points according to this form and this quantity on the thigh below the hip bones, which will help the patient's decubitus.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And if the space is the one that is between each cauterization according to the largest part of the said, and the cauterization according to the length of the body from the side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	When you do not understand the purpose of the cautery tool.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of water that is consumed is not adjusted according to the amount of meat in the codfish; and if the thigh is resting on the patient's feet; and if it is not, then the patient should be placed in a reclining position, raising the upper body.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cauterization:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And are you able to perform this cauterization using a cautery tool, with subtlety and prudence in the art?
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, and let the entire codfish be consumed until it is fully digested and passed into the intestines, where the codfish is delicate; and you know that.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capital.28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of perforation of the aposteme of the patient by cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an ache or aposteme is felt in the patient and you want to know if that aposteme is in the meat of the patient or in the skin, then if it is in the meat of the patient, the thigh becomes heavy and painful at its acuity.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If the pain is in the clothing of the patient, and the pain is severe and often, it exhausts the doctors in treating him.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, this hernia should be turned over onto the cecum; and then carefully insert the cauterization point at the location of the appendix; and then apply the cauterization as it is resembled to a rag, the form of which is prescribed in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it and cauterize within the total intestine is covered, within when it reaches the caecum, within if it causes inflammation.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And cure this by treating the other hernias within when it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	But this form of cauterization should not be used except for the one studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in many of which maladies are known; but this has been seen some times to be very painful about this operation, but rather it is necessary for us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cauterization of hernias.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	When the ancient cauteries of surgery are used for this purpose, and it is this that you take from the bag of aristocratic surgery, and a long strip of leather that is found, and it is of the largest kind of the same, then it is this.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And it is submerged in oil and heated at the fire, and it is cauterized with a cauterization tool located in that place which is between the continuity of the shoulder blade and the collar; and two small ones are placed laterally, one slightly declining towards the part where the beard is left, and two others are placed descending between the fifth costal and the inguinal, descending a little on the parts behind; and one cauterization tool in the middle of the chest, and over the stomach, and three cauterizations on the back parts; and one cauterization in that place which is between the two spines, and two others on the two sides of the pectoral muscle, and then the cauterization on the two sides of the pectoral muscle.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary that you buy your own knife, and be in the manifest of the codex in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	When it is known that certain men use cauteries made of iron, resembling a rake and fire, and place them in the location between the ribs, when they feel the heat spreading to the appendix and become infected, it is said in the appendix of the patient.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this puncture with cauterization, there is no fear, as it happens so often in the location of the fistula that is not treated and becomes infected.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the meatus.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the uterus of the meatus, it is said that the cure is in the division and not your cure, and you should cauterize on it in three or four lines according to the length of the meatus according to the figure of the cauteries of the patient, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be between every cauterization the largest of one or a few days, and the hand of the cauterization is the hand that has been said in the cauterization of the patient's tongue.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	When you do not understand your pain; and the thighs are already bare over the desired part.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is why you need to have two points of ignition, the cause of which has been said in the capital of muscle dislocation, and it is the coda that is at the end of the tableau, where the jaw of the left hand is located.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if your elevation is in the area where the coda is raised according to the length of the body, then the points are cauterized according to the latitude of the chest.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then enter the two points of ignition, lit with fire, in that entrance where those penetrate the coda of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And remove the cauterization; and then it is four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you see, cauterize with three points of ignition.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cauterization by putting it in a way that it does not stick to the skin for too long, as it is more comfortable than the previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital.xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of gout.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The translation of "Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriamente" from the given medieval medical treatise is: "Do not use cauterization
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat joint pain with the proper tools of the trade, such as the thumb, finger, and palm, it is important to note that they should not cause excessive heat or damage. Instead, use four cauteries in the circumference of the affected area, one on the stomach, one on the gallbladder, one on the small intestine, and two on the spinal columns of the back, and one on the right side of the chest. Additionally, use another cauterization on the esophagus and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The depth of the cauterization is proportionate to the sharpness of the point.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And the cauterization is carefully performed, taking care not to break it for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the medicine of cure from the cauterization as much as possible, so that it does not add to the pain, and it is hurried to help with the care.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cauterization is that which is cut on the belly, and it is like that of the previous one, and it is that for the two that are cut in the same way as before.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with stinging water, carefully cauterize the feet on the thighs in a corner where there is no ear or anus, and raise your hand over the cauterization and do not pull it; and then raise your hand, and do not return to that of all, for the stinging water will return.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This is the translation of the first source sentence:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	If the cautery is according to the length of the thigh: and then the other and the other end of the thigh's location; and over each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	When the plague is openly treated for a long time by oneself, some poisonous waters come out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And cure those causes that have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterization of things from the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When things from the belly are burned and enter the body, it is the digestive and retentive vertute that is in the stomach and intestines, and is cured with that as the main care of the curer and not confers, and sometimes the thigh suffers cauterization of the intestine exposed, they are cauterized with a large cauterization on the stomach wall according to what was done in the cauterization of the stomach, in the cauterization of the circle and four cauterizations in the circuit of the subtle embrace, in the cauterization of the clavicle; and in the cauterization over the alazas on large aloes, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excessive humors and the thigh tolerate it, then do so with cauterization over the panting and the intestines, and much adjusting two cauterizations on the stomach and part of the thighs, four are cured perfectly of which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The text you provided is not in the language of Latin, Italian,
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	I apologize for the confusion earlier. Here's a translation of the line you provided:
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When old embalmed materials or a gross humor or corrupted wetness is found in nature, and they are cured by this that has been said in the division and does not confirm the second cure, then they are cauterized with three points on the tip of the spine of the two small and small triangles, and on the omentum with two points.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is often scratched, then cauterize that on the stomach with a large cauterization preceded by one; and another on the thigh, and another on the back of the neck, and let the cauterization be rubbed for some time, and it will cure it when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital, Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of the anus, apply the abscess of them.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cauterize the anus, you should choose the cauterization that is most suitable for the ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place that ignition on the anus abscess, and then the second time when it comes to the vein orifice where you see the sand.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When a joint is inflamed and swollen to an excessive degree, it is necessary to cauterize each of the affected parts that have come into contact with the cold humors, and apply appropriate care to those parts that will provide relief from the pain as soon as they are cured.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you use a large cauterization over a small area, it may not work well.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitulum xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The cauterization of bumps that are naturally present in the body is described in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, it can be cured with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when you find an unnatural bump in the body, and it is old, covered with scurf and corrupt humors, and therefore it is deemed that the subtle covering should be removed, and accordingly the quantity of the depth of the said bump should be known beforehand.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	A prop uses the cauterization that seems like a torch.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place that burning cautery in this hole, and afterwards according to the quantity in which you will thrust it into the intestine.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that the cautery until those corrosive bodies of the corrupted body are completely burned, according to the quantity you need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of the combustion of nerves and veins; or if the hole goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, you should be careful of all those places; and do not proceed unless the hole is in a fleshy part and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the place after it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and all the materials are removed from it, and there are signs of healing for a long time, you will know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not from the wound, you will know that they penetrate or in the pre-wound area they corrode, or you will remember those causes for which there will be remorse in that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not a complete sentence or phrase
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	De cauterizacio dels ronhos: This translates to "Of cauterization of the joints.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio: This translates to "When joint pain is caused by cold humors or large ventilation, and the thigh of the patient is swollen, then cover that with a cautery on the joints, as one does with a cauterizing iron on each joint, which preserves the memory.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament: This translates to "And then we cut a small piece, so that three lines of cauterization appear, and thus fewer wounds are made in the future.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii: This is a page number, not a sentence or
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	De cauterizacio de la vesica: This translates to "Of cauterization of the vagina
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu: This translates to "When the vagina becomes soft and malleable due to cold humors or wetness, and the patient's urine does not retain it, then cover that with a cautery on the opening of the vagina, starting from the front, and also on the side, and also on the rear.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	When the length of any cautery is according to the number of thorns of the pous; and cauterize that cautery in the lower part of the two, or two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	If the cautery rod is then processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitulum XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Chapter XXXIX on cauterization of the thigh.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold humors and wetness are present in the thigh, and prevention of inflammation is prohibited, and the menstrual flow is corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and pain is felt from it, then it is necessary to cauterize that place with three cautery rods around the umbilicus, as has been said in the cauterization of the vesica; or cauterize above the spot where the two have been, or with two cautery rods, and use the clavilh cautery rod.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL on cauterization of the thigh.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Chapter XL on cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When cold humors are wet and infiltrated into the ankle part, and such causes of swelling of the joint are produced, and it is said that the thigh is extended over the other than when they are compared to each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	When the location of the dislocation is in the knee joint.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	It is believed that the cautery should be placed on the thigh bone over the ankle joint, as you have the handle in the circumference of the ankle point, and for this reason the ankle falls into the circle's location.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And if the cautery precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at your present, you should cauterize that with the great olive cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And it is believed that the cauterization should be made according to the amount of the dissection of the entire spine; and it is necessary to care for that when it is cured.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the knee joint, and the cause is the cold and humidity of the leg, the thigh bone is cured as it has been said and not confessed, and this is antiquated, you should know that you loose the thigh bone of large humors with pills made or artificial or similar; and you should cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	When the cautery is used, there are two hands: one for hot cautery used in medicine, and another for fire cautery.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are three scientific hands, one of which is used to cauterize over the ankle of the patient in this manner: and make sure it is deep enough.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterization is the quantity of the growth of the said and if it is thin or thick.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes, the cauterization is made over the middle of the head of the patient for which there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize on the circle that is required for the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and that the circle be continuous and burn the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the hand of cauterization in cases where pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend to the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it is extended to the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauterizations over the thigh at the location where the wound of the ankle is; and there is a cauterization on the hole for four parts of the flesh.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the cauterization is done with a cutellar, and the depth of the cauterization depends on the amount of spinal fluid in the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the pain spreads to the area around the foot, and the above-mentioned points are located there, then cauterize this area with the tail of the cauterization instrument three times or four or more if directed by the pain.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the pain is felt further down the leg, then cauterize this area with a cutellar cauterization instrument.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And keep in mind that during the cauterization, do not apply it to the nerve or large artery as a burn, and if so, you may cause the patient to have difficulty walking or contracting.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one and another of those which were cauterized on the cavity and end of the cauterization, and the bed was inflamed within which the tumor achieved the pain, and the focus burned and corrupted the entire pain.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And apropos, an acidic solution of the stomach, and aqueously there is death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts, it should be cauterized on each of these fingers.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The first source sentence to translate is:
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And make that circle another part; and it is the space that exists between them in the quantity of their notz of pous; and those circles are divided into two parts; and the length of those arms is a notz or two notzs, and make those margins of iron decently covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	When the fire is placed in the oven as it begins to glow and emit sparks, and when it is placed on the intestine, the hernia is placed over the abdomen, the patient lies on their back.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then, apply cauterization to that point with three points in a line.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And wrap that around for three days; apply plaster to the border and keep the wound clean for several days; and cure that part when it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this kind of cauterization few have used due to the fear of the gaze of it, and therefore few have found those who look at it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May be less painful for the patient, and it will anesthetize that part of the body.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauterization be a remedy for doctors because you make two circles with holes perforated in the one where the guzzle of the ferrule's door is; the length of the sides in the natural state of theirs are two noses or those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the spaces that are between the quantity of the growth of this one; and they are opened further and deeper, and they contain something between them in this way:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And if you pause over the joint of the ankle, and compresses your hand over the joint; and take a cool water bath and pour it through two circles, and the quality of that is like the small pieces of fire, and to that quantity per hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the thirst of it — which that biting stops when the mouth is dry — then if the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And raise your hand over the joint and wipe away all the water from that joint with the water you have.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And massage that for three days and place your hand over that border until the thirst of the adhustion remains, and massage it for several days, and run the poultice; this is good for the body.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And cure that if it is sore within which is healthy.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is extended within the thigh or leg, make this statue in it that contains water according to what is made in the ankle joint.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the manicure of the cold humor, and I have already written about this in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alcali and caus that is not extinguished in one part, and strip it and pause in a new wave of the quality that the part is left with a small hole made by a needle, according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then leave the fountain of another wave carried over, and put on the living alcali and caus of water, two drops of which are taken by a dropper, and I ask you to understand those in the first part with good compression, and let the hot water flow through the part that is left in the carried-over wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water, and put on over another living alcali and another novel caus, four of which are made of strong acuity, which is maintained in the motions of medicine and cauterization of other members, which operation is like a focus.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of some medicines some are made of those that are cauterized wide, as if it were silk and honey and caus are mixed in them.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is near a certain herb, and not a poisonous one, then the recent finger should be held in a small amount of grease; and it should be placed over the ankle where the pain is, or the thigh, or the chest, and it should be observed.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for three hours or until the patient's condition improves by three degrees.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And place that on the body and when the patient's abdomen is swollen, enter that in the soil, and the pain will cease and it will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	 Do you know that not all doctors use cauterization for these medicines except for the removal of the abdomen?
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	I have already heard that when a goat's horn is used to cauterize the stretched vein, it can be used again; and this is how the cauterization should be done on the second hand: it should be held by wool and moistened with ancient oil, and it should be placed between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And if you hold a dry goat's horn and heat it up when the pain is caused by carbon, then place it on the wool and observe the swelling.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	When you apply this remedy, and do not stop until the pain caused by the biting subsides, and the swelling in the ankle disappears.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called cauterization with pins.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization for pain in the foot.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes the pain is in the foot due to various causes such as inflammation or cuts or excessive evacuation, and for causes similar to those, by infusion of wet and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not work alone in this specific case, which is caused by the effusion of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, the excess of matter in the thigh is eliminated by pills fitted to the shape of the thigh, which are placed over the pain in the foot, three lines below the latitude of the knee, according to the quantity that can tolerate the thigh and the beauty of the knee.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And if there is pain, then use cauterization with a point.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, make points with three or four cauters or with a clavicle on the medial side of the finger according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitulare de Cure de Pain (Book XLIII) is the
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Tortures visible on this evil in the small children; and at the beginning of the children, that happens to them over their structure in the knee and the elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And atrophy of the lower back of the two and of the notches of the body that begins to overcome the other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to prohibit, make points with the cautery that is a circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over the entire part of the lower back of the spine.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, make points with the cautery in the circle of the spine with the cautery of two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And these points are between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And cure the place where it is healthy as they have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	When using cauterization, it should not be applied in yellowish areas that are caused by muscle spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the treatment of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And in order to cure gout caused by cold humors and not make the pain worse, apply cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And is that you cauterize that empty space in the circuit of the joint of the foot, not in the cauterization.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of the cauterization:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain spreads to the nearby joints or other joints, and it worsens, apply cauterization to each joint three or four times with this cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If the points are necessary for you to make, then make those points and do not press too hard on your hand with the cauterization, as long as it is only about the specific area of the ribcage.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain comes into the thigh and knee, then administer the cauterization that has been said in the capital city.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is in the more than necessary areas, and it is called gout, then make points on the circuit of the foci that rotate, make points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the mentioned areas, then make points on the circuit of the foci over each nail and on the tip of the toe.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain comes to the nearest parts of the thighs or muscles, then cauterize the points on all parts of the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the bad regimen and reception of medicines, as if it is done well and is not flat, then this cauterization will be healthy, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text "Capitol
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	 is not a complete sentence and does not contain any recognizable words in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the joint pain is in the ankles and bones, and then it starts to appear in the testicles, and that's where you should ask the patient to eat less in the morning and use gentle causes for it because the pain is coming from the morning's stomach.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient's legs over the patient's chest and command the patient to hold the stomach until it gets hungry or appears that the testicles or the intestines are coming out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the patient's hand to the tie and try to hold the rupture over the pelvis bone, and then show the end of it that seems to be like the circumference of the circle at the divided parts of the chest.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then use the cauterization that this is the form of it:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	when it is very hungry and gets hot pulsations.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then reduce the hernia or intestine to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	You should carefully observe the position of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, so that you do not burn that intestine because it may not come out of the thigh or another great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you know that if you touch the cautery with your bones, do not confirm your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	It is important that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their greatness and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And carefully treat the area of the cauterization for three days, so that the wound of the fire is not inflamed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of these others as soon as they are healthy.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The wound should be covered over the good buttock for four days after it is sealed and dressed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is important to pause nutrition according to the length of time the cure takes for the belly of the patient, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to take away four days, administer decent medication and hold onto it for another four hours.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	It is necessary to work and eat and drink, and to be very vigorous, when you use this entire regimen of treatment for your health.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	When the first incision has been made and it is necessary to cauterize it, use a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is easier to handle.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And place a line perpendicular to the rupture line and another line below it; then remove your hand from the cauterizing iron, as the first cauterizing iron was placed further away and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitulum xlvi.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Chapter on the cauterization of a bend.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in any member for a long time and does not relieve with bandaging or percussion, it is necessary to cauterize with a point cauterizing iron.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauterization of each member should be according to its size and thickness, as well as its veins and the location of the bend and the pain in that area.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the patient is cured by the first cauterization, that is good; and if not, you should continue to cauterize it. Four out of five of those pains are local, so you can use the point cauterizing iron on the affected member, as it is close to the one that has been injured, so that you can reach those with the cauterizing iron once the member is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language that is
De cauterizacio de lepra.	De cauterizacio de lepra" translates to "Of cauterization in leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia" translates to "The wounds of some leprosy patients are treated with cauterization for great benefit, and management is also provided for the specific leprosy caused by putrefaction of flax and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz." translates to "If you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is contagious and as it has been cured according to the division and not done, nor this, and fears about the wound that the corruption understands the whole body of him and all the complexion of him, then cauterize that on the head with a piece of cauterizing material, one on the second part behind, over the forehead or servant; and two on the nape or servants.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	When the last wound is almost complete and the pressure of the cautery enters the bones, and the lungs are displaced due to the expulsion of large vapors, it is then that the cautery is applied over the table as required.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and manifestly appears, you should cover that with a cautery on those cauterizations that have been made on the head; and apply cauterization at the tip of the nose, and two on the upper lip, and two on the lower lip, and two on the two spines of the neck, and one on the spine of the back, and one near the hip bone, and one on the hip, and one on each ankle, and one on each toe, and one on each knuckle, and one on each muscle; and apply it over all the joints of the teeth and toes, and over each toe of the feet, and over the fascia of the toes.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep watch over the nerves that are above the thigh but not burned by those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	When some joints are cauterized on the bones of the patella and others on the mouth of the stomach, and others on the thigh, it means that...
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	You should know that the fewer cauterizations you make, the better it is and the more effective; and you should know that the thigh does not feel pain in the cauterization, so do as they have them, according to what has already happened to the body of the patient.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauterizations are large or small according to the members and joints, according to what precedes the specific tools of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And properly care for the cauterization with flour of errors, melted wax, and the other cure that is made when it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization of stupefaction.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any part of the body is stunned or falls asleep and is treated with medicines, plasters, and ointments, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that stunned part according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And this is the smallest cauterization entering the intestine of the thigh a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And properly care for that according to what is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes some parts are cauterized with a certain stupefying substance that ends up in the most and least parts of the body, as well as in the spine and you see the symptoms of the nerves that move that member, and it becomes stupefied.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But one should not presume about this except for that which is known in the anatomy of the member and the exit of the nerves that move all parts of the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization of warts that are cancerous.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When warts are old and do not conform to the shape of the body part, then you should cauterize over that area using a certain amount of the substance that is on the inside of the codpiece, and the whiteness and color of it will change.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice made of flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and arsenic leaves, and a piece of cloth to cover the area, and place it over the location until it becomes healthy again.
Capitol .l.	The first line of the text is "Capitol .l.",
De cauterizacio de cranc.	which translates to "Of cauterization of the anus".
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, you cauterize that part with a pointed cautery around the circumference of the anus as it rotates.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And decide which part is cauterized with the pointed cautery in the middle of the anus; I have not seen this, but it may be ulcerated, and I have already seen some wounds.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is a scar that is cauterized around the circumference of the anus as we have said, or it may be cauterized elsewhere.
Capitol .li.	The last line of the text is "Capitol .li.",
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	which translates to "Of cauterization of the anus".
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adulthood is delayed in maturation, and it happens that this happens due to excess or due to the state of the anus, which is old and few in sanctity, or due to time, and you want to speed up the maturation of adulthood; then cauterize around the circumference of the anus where the pointed cautery is smallest point; and put that where it fastens in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make an incision in the patient's foot, then you should use this type of cauterization: and slowly advance it into the flesh until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization is made in that place where it was placed before, so that the corset of the breast is adjusted; and then care for it inside as soon as it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization of corrosions.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a wandering corruption in the body that consumes that part like fire eats dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you sometimes see the corrosion in that place where it suffered cauterization like fire, then you should use few cauterizing pins and others according to what is appropriate in that place where the corrosions are.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And you should cauterize it from all sides until you have eradicated the entire corrosion and not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And dress it for three days, and then over the cauterized places apply oil mixed with a little soap every day until all the scars are completely eradicated and the corruption is totally removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	When one is suffering from that which causes the flesh to be swollen and enflamed, it is necessary to take proper care of that affected part.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the flesh appears healthy in that part where there is no corruption, then so be it; otherwise, you must repeat the cauterization over the area where the corruption has risen in the affected parts.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And when the inflammation is treated by some physicians of acute medicine, they place that in the location of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization is not always effective in removing puss.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And as I have already spoken of the treatment of the acute medicine division, and now I will take that when the disease is about to occur.
Capitol .liii.	Capital. IIIIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of the claw and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Blisters are seen in the parts of the foot that are affected by gout, and it is caused by a large, rough, which pierces the foot; and cauterization is applied to those areas with two hands, which is cauterization with hot iron and cauterization with cold iron.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	When making incisions with a cautery, it is best to make them resemble a pinprick, as if they were made by fire, according to the quantity of iron that contains the clasp of the entire part, and it should be subtle cuts.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then stop the fire on the clasp, and turn your hand over the cauterization, and place it in the circuit of the clasp as soon as the cautery reaches the depth of the clasp.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it remain for three days after beginning to gargle with salt.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And apply the plaster made with salted vinegar to that area, and let it remain on for a day, until that part is completely eradicated from your skin.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And cure the wound with the generated flesh as soon as it becomes healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and visible wounds appear on the surface of the body, especially on the chest and feet, then you should apply a poultice made with water, or iron, or a hot poker, and place it over the clasp; and gargle with a little amount of water in the poultice, and hold your hand over it, and turn the poultice as often as necessary, and press the margin of the canula against the skin of the clasp, and draw out the water from the clasp through the opening of the canula; and wait for a while until the wound is healed by the mouth of the canula, and apply that, so that the clasp leaves its marks on the skin.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	When you insert your hand into the body part that is causing pain, it should be done with care and respect for the patient's comfort.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And you should clean the area thoroughly, removing any impurities and ensuring that the skin is clean before proceeding with any further treatment.
Capitol .liiii.	That's all for now. If you have any more questions or need further assistance
De cauterizacio de tremor.	I'm sorry, I don't have enough context to provide a translation for "De cauterizacio de t
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling occurs due to cold or fever affecting the nerves, or for any other reason, it is customary to apply heat to the affected area. This can be done by placing a hot compress on the spine of the back, between each vertebra, and also on the chest and stomach. The hot compress should be applied with care to avoid burns.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if the trembling subsides, it will help to restore the health of the patient.
Capitol .lv.	That's all for now. If you have any more questions or need
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	I'm sorry, I don't have enough context to provide a translation for "De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors." Can
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When inflammation occurs in the body, and pustules form on the affected areas, which are caused by fatty, corrupt materials; therefore, it is customary to apply heat to the beginning of the fistula, where a subtle cauterization is made with a small cautery, the extremity of which is extended to the focus; or to long-term erestologia; or to lentecular cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And for some people, cauterization is made at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and it is not surprising, and it breaks the superfluity making those, and they become healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	When I say, "May this be enough for the evacuation of the womb," it means that I am performing a hysterectomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitulum LVII.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of venous congestion caused by an incision of the arch of the foot.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When troops are seen flowing from the arrowhead that is cut by the plague which destroys, or by the incision of apostemas or cauterization of the member, and then it seems to disappear, but it is difficult to remain with that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When you encounter gout, cut a piece of your own flesh at the ankle and place it over that which is called the hammer of the artery, and hold it there until that which is called the waves of the blood come out from where the current of the sinus has been stopped, and it does not leave.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the cautery oil lamps a few and large ones, by name, and exhale over those that are not yet ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those a small or a large piece of the location and plague over the artery that is being broken in the vessel that has been strongly pushed back, and place the cautery inside so that it is contained and restricted to the sinus.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the sinus is expelled from the artery when you hold the piece of flesh and remove the cautery, then take another sharp cautery from the ones that are in the fire, and continue doing this until the sinus is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And remember that you do not burn the nerves that are here, and that it will come over another mischief in the thigh.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	1. You should know that when the artery flows through a narrow place, it is not possible to restrain it, and especially when the artery is large, it is not possible with just four fingers: either with cauterization as said above, or with extraction if it is not extracted, four if it is extracted, but the extremities of the nails are charred and the wound is closed and restricted by the artery, or if it is stretched over the medicines that restrict the artery's flow; and they are firmly held in place on the pulley of the constraint.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	2. Only that which administers proper care to the tightening of the artery and its stretching, or by position of burning and resembling causes, does not satisfy unless it is tart.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	3. If you do not have a doctor or physician present, then you can use the mentioned stoppage on the wound of that vein as it has been said, and understand the great stretching of the entrance of the artery that the sac is left behind from the former part of the plague, and over the artery it is not damaged; and over the artery it is sprinkled with cold water from a large frigidity when the sac is tightened and engorged; and do not waste time in which one has to cauterize or use medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The first source sentence, "Comensa la segonda partida," translates to "Begin the
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are phrases from Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	The first source sentence translates to:
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When you process this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who asks for it is satisfied, do as follows.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	After you begin this, son, that you have learned that in this chapter it is for fear of you that it is in the first book of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, son, that you have learned that in this operation, which is in the first book of cauterization, great care must be taken, that in the removal of the visible part, the vein must be cleaned or an incision made over the aposteme or an excision made for the purification of the plague or the extraction of the sweat or an incision for the urine, and the appearance of the parts.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all these things that are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the greatest of them is death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And you should warn you that on you this does not fall, because some visible parts must be handled by men who are skilled in such matters.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is said that you must go to your malady and be healed by him, and thus for the vehemence of his malady, and for its long duration, and for the malady of the one who is being cured, and for the malady that signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	When you have selected the appropriate tool, you expect that this treatment will bring about healing and the malady is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so do not assume that you agree with what appears to you as this method; and your caution should be greater than assumed and your greed; and do not suspect any cause other than a certain science known to you, and the one that is followed in succession is praised.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the care of all your diseases of prognosis and indication of the one that is converted to health, where you are helped over the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God in you inspires the divine understanding and does not leave you without direction and protection, where this is in its place.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you and order this capital distinguished by capitols following that precedes in the capital of cauteries, of the care of the head to the feet, so that it is for you alleviated from that which you asked for that and of the one that has need.
Capitol primier.	The first line of the text is "Capitol primier.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	This translates to: "Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	This translates to: "You know that this childhood malady, which you have seen in children, requires pediatric care and when the nurse shaves the child's head, it must be done.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	This translates to: "And some are caused by a lack of cleanliness that is not cleaned.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This translates to: "I have not seen this malady in children, and in all those that I have seen who suffered from death, and therefore I have seen less work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	This translates to: "And I have seen that a child's head which was filled with water, and the head of the child was completely wet, and he could not be shaved because the size of the child's head was too large, and less so when the heat of the fire made it worse.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This translates to: "And this moisture is added between the spine and the bone, or it is added further on the bones.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	In the first source sentence, it seems that the text is describing an operation where humidity is present between the ribs and the bone. The text suggests that you should cover the area with a piece of cloth before performing the operation in the head area, near the neck, where there is a fissure in the latitud, and the length of the fissure should be about two notches within which the humidity runs. This is the form of the sputum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If humidity increases and the aposteme becomes greater, you will find two incisions according to this manuscript:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity reaches the skull, then you see the commissures of the opened cap and the blood is squirting when you press on that arm but not on the parts of the fingers and not on the parts of the nails.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When you cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And press the incision into the entire moisture; and stretch the fissures with drapes and plumasses; and cover it over with a bandage and let it enter the fifth day, and remove the liment and care for the wound that you have, and tighten the cap with equal force; and eat the member of the patient's body that is dry with little moisture until the part is comfortable and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	This appears to be a medical instruction for performing an incision. The translation would be:
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	You should observe whether the artery is not torn and does not leak fluid from the sinus, as that flux of blood can cause the patient's leg to swell.
Capitol .ii.	Capitol, ii.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of tearing of the arteries which are closest to the temples, called hilasses.
Capitol segon.	Capitol, second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When you cut the catars or rumors of the hips or chest, and it is found that this does not cause pain, and no cure is given by the doctor, then the same cure is given in this case of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to cut those that the patient wants to have, and cut through the skin as thinly as possible in the place where the arteries are located, and strengthen the collar of the leg with a drap; and consider where the vein is located; and the places of each over the places which are closest to the temples, and they are hidden so much in the hands of men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And cover the artery you want to cut, and cut through each one of the parts that are closest to the temples, and be careful not to go inside the bone, and it will be like this according to the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, enter the spatula and push it through the artery to the parts where the pain is located.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	If the length of the incision is two thirds of an inch, then when any vein is incised, the vein expands and becomes more permeable to blood flow, which causes it to swell.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear in the constriction, you must measure the distance from the ankle to three inches, and then insert it, and then enter the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And if you cover the incision with a piece of cloth, and then cut it as little as possible, and then as much as possible, and then according to the amount that appears on the thigh and the emptying of the artery, it is appropriate.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And if you consider the swelling, and then if there is anything on the bone that causes the inflammation, then incise it according to what does not cause gangrene cauterization.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then press the swelling with a plaster and bandage, and take care of it as soon as it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the extraction of the gallstones that are in the templates.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old wound or scar is caused by humorous cold and bad quality in the leather of the shoes, or if an old sore is very painful and resembles those, and it is treated with the manicure of medical curing and it does not comfort, then we have found in these maladies extraction of the arches in the shoes, or cauterization of those parts that have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The manicure of the operation and extraction of those is what races the pelvis of those that are in the shoes; and understand the apparent arch in the shoe that it is shown to you by the sharp nails, and it is hidden only in a few people by the vehemence of the friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, the belly of the pelvis is strengthened by some fabric; and if you rub the place with a rough or dry cloth or wet one that enters you what seems to you the apparent arch obviously.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And take the sap of this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And you heat the knot with that which is easy to enter within what comes to the arch; and you get in it and extract that from the adjacent parts within what is extracted from that of the knot and discover the tunic of those which are all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, wrap it around the extremity of the organ, and cut through it at that point according to the quantity by which they are elongated at the ends of the organ and are contracted, and do not let any fluid flow out, for if it is not incised, it will not be able to rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove the sac of the third part.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, wrap it around in two places at a double bend or with cords that are not too tight, and do not leave it exposed to putrefaction during the consolidation of the plague and prevent fluid from flowing out.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut off the superfluity that is between two ligaments; and do so at that time or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, cauterize that part with a cauterizing instrument within the bone with a cauterizing knife within which the incised extremities of the organ are placed, and it will remain in place for that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient does not have fever or is not suffering from a punctured wound; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to dry out the more humid parts, and therefore it is better for healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	When the extraction of the archways that obstruct the ancient location of the toe is made, and they are placed over the polls in a decent manner, and the doctor's care is applied to make the flesh and bones healthier within which it is located, it becomes saner.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while working on another view of the flow of sand from the archway, you hold back that sand with your hand or a cautery, or by compressing the toe area and stretching your hand inside which it is restricted, you can hold back the sand.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If the cause of this is not in your present, you pause on the small thing about the location inside which the sand is compacted, and wet the location with warm water inside which the sharpness repairs, and it becomes stronger than before.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is said about the extraction of the archway is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have seen the two points in the testicle and stopper, and incise the vein in two places, so that it is elongated as much as possible between the extremities of the bone, which are not strengthened by all of this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of cauterization:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by do
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the joint pain is more severe than that of two knees, and it occurs suddenly in one knee, and does not affect the flesh quickly, then...
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	And if there is any swelling in those, the heat of the fire is held on those and the flesh is slowly peeled off.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than the whole work and has less.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two knees is the quantity of the swelling of the said.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of the heart of sudden and acidic wounds of the heels.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the wounds are acidic, and the heart of those veins which are over the test of the skull deformed, and do not agree with any cause of medicine cure, and sometimes the face of the foot is bent and appears in the front of ambulation as if it were the ambulation of ants, and the heels are extended, they become wet because their nails are already conodutz, and the toenails are scalped by the acuteness of the tears, the ancient stinks in the cure of those of this operation, and nomber that cure is far.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	When you command the patient to remove their hair on the front of the head, and insert three incisions into the forehead, separated by the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the incision is two thirds, then the first incision should be distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the front location, and the second one should be a little bit behind the movement of the eyelids that are in the lacrimal, and the third one should be on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep watch on the incision of the arches that are in two lats, and extend your hand for the continuation of cutting the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If the space of each incision is adjusted to three thirds.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have a sponge or cloth that absorbs moisture and dries the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then place the sponge of two sharp edges, of which this is the form of the incision of the wound:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that comes from the opening of the template to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	When pain is felt throughout the entire chain that passes between two cuts on the coccyx, and it moves to the second cut, it is called excoria by doctors.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And if you find this spot and enter into it another instrument called a cuticular knife, sharp on one side and blunt on the other, you can proceed with the operation.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then place the blunt side of that sharp knife on the flesh, and the sharp side on the bone, and pull that which has entered through the fissure towards the heel, and cut off all those that descend from the head to the toes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May this cut continue through the coccyx, and it will be transferred to the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And push that part until the quantity of blood comes out, then remove the parts of the pessaries that are connected.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then stop in any fissure that has a thick hair, and stop on those powders that are wet with oil and vinegar, and see if it does not cause an abscess to form.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day after the limb is affected and a large amount of water or pus exudes from it, and proper care is given to this so that the diseases are cured, it is called an abscess, which is red or pinkish-red, and others come in contact with it.
Capitol .v.	Capital v. (Latin for "capital city") is a term used
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of gallbladder pain using hot and cold therapy and the dripping of the parts connected to the divisions of the cap.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the vein becomes hot and continues to drip, and the parts of the thigh become thin, and the observation of them is improved, and the ulcerated eyes and eyelids are affected, and in the prevention of the head there is acute pain and distension, know that these accidents are caused by materials and veins that do not come from vascular waves of the parts connected to the divisions of the cap.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for this is to command the thigh that it should be raised, and insert one's hand into the fissure in the middle of the front, a small hole (and begin at the fissure of the left temple entering the right temple; and enter within the bone; and elongate your thumb with the claws of the temples that are not sharp enough for mastication), within which the bone is discovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	When you have dried all the bandages or cloths, or if they are wet, fill them between the lips of the fissure or the folds of the cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And if you must use powder on the affected area, use it with care, as it may cause an allergic reaction to the cautery.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the apostrem has decreased, know that the humors have entered that part of the flesh which begins at the navel, and apply a remedy that dries the skin, as if you were making bread from wheat and four parts of coal and mixing them, and this plaster should be applied to these plagues on the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the remedy that is applied to the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The reason that is applied to the ears is one of four kinds, which may be mineral or resemble mineral, as iron and steel, or it may be from a plant, such as chamomile or fennel, or it may cause fluxion, as water and vinegar, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And you have already opened the circuit of the thigh around some sutures of cloth or wool, and extended the thigh to its parts, as many as four or five degrees are forgotten about these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not set, you administer the extraction of the joint with the instrument called the gesticular epicicaries subtle of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten, do not; and if not, you administer the extraction of the joint with the subtle substance of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not forgotten for this, you make a cannula of aram and enter the extremity of the cannula into the end of the thigh and close the enclosure of the cannula with cera and ointment mollified so that it is not torn except the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	When the wind is strong and drawn towards the mouth, too many people have been seen to come.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If this maneuver is not forgotten, you will take hold of the altar or the veil, and press it gently on the part that is causing pain, and put it at the end of the ray, and place it comfortably on the cot.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And enter that into the opening of the auricle, and remove the moisture from the auricle.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if you do not forget all the causes that have been mentioned, then you will cut at that point where the gout or hernia comes out.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The maneuver of cutting at that point is that you start by cutting the vein of the leg and then extract it after the second maneuver of the virtue of the patient, and place a small fissure in the tip of the auricle and introduce the gout or hernia in the location where it is most painful.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	If the lunar figure's fissure is found within the foot, and the foot is atrophied, then use an appropriate instrument to open it; and at that time, with speed, treat it within the foot so that it becomes healthy again.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the pain is in the ankle, it is one of the thick and inflamed ones, then maintain the cure and extraction; but if you do not obey your instructions, you must take some fine mud in this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and maintain the cure of that thick one which is causing pain in the ankle.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not apply this if you think that the foot has already been moistened by the steam of the ankle, and stop that with gentle movements, and remove it from those or from subtle gestures, or if you have to cut, then this extraction is allowed.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the ankle that is inserted into the foot, if the malady uses strangulation to condone the beginning, and complete the ankle with the old cut, and apply the ankle on that ankle where the water is, and if for that you forget it, do not; but if not, take a few peas and leons according to the length of the same, and heat them in the fire, and the patient puts one of them in the front of the ankle and jumps over it with the other foot and percusses on another ankle.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Thus, do not cease to drink this remedy as soon as all the urine is excreted.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the urine is completely excreted, take a piece of paper or cloth, and place one end of it in the urethra and stretch the other end outside to prevent the urine from being spilled.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place as many catheters as necessary to prevent all the urine from being spilled, and stretch the cannula until it is completely inserted.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the removal of a foreign body from the urethra, if it is small, it can be removed with gentle forceps and the patient should feel relieved as described in the division; but if it is large, causing pain in the bladder, manage the removal of the foreign body with care and strength, and the cause of the pain should be distinguished from all other causes that may cause discomfort in the urethra.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the removal of a worm from the urethra, if you follow the instructions given in the division and during the treatment of distillations and do not cause discomfort to your patient, then cover the urethra with sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If here appears any cause of the verms, then take out that am gesture or am onci subtle, rather if no appear any other cause, then take a catheter further away and pull it out through this one is the form of the intestine:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Enter the subtle end into the hole according to the quantity that suffers because of the thigh; and then make a little cut there, and make some watches visible, enter when all the verms are out.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey to your appointment, then take it and close it in the circuit of the catheter as has been said; then administer distillations which have already spread the old ones in the treatment of the verms, and find it here in the distillation book.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And is your effusion the one that efunds the medicinal oils in the hole, this instrument of which this is the form of the intestine:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make that of silver or of gold, further away, in which there is a small hole, and press down.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so be it as they are in the cavity of the uterus here where it is necessary to make the incision.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the knife and wrap it at the end of the uterus, and carefully insert it into the concave part of the anus, or of any herb, or of that which you want from these medicines in the canula — and that is in the vagina —, and gently pull out the knife through the vagina and quickly compress the canula to prevent the oil from being expelled in the concave part of the anus and the uterus feeling the oil.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And if it is wrapped in the vagina, it has already been cut at the focus of a small one.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you will distill in the vagina is not too weak, for the medicines of the vagina do not suffer from this.
Capitol .vii.	Capitulare.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the treatment of female infertility.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some women have children born from the wombs of other women who have not been pierced, and this infertility has occurred in men as well, due to the lack of plague or nothing in that; and this infertility is sometimes found in the preservation of the vagina that does not have the virginity, and it is sometimes found in the parts that are deformed.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	When an accident occurs in the body part that does not understand its purpose, it is in the most difficult medical situations.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And if you manage to understand the purpose in that place, cover the anus of the patient with your hand and look there.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see swelling apparently, open that area with a gentle spatula of the type of this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it in which the size is small, the type of which one part is acute and the other is not; and the spatula is of two sizes for the body that does not hurt the anus.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is due to flesh in the anus or in the meat of it, use those fine spatulas and press with that great force that is left on the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the body part of the anus, use a fine spatula of leon and heat it up a little, and then place it in the anus meat.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you feel swelling here that the thigh is increasing in difficulty, due to heaviness of the body, try to increase the pressure on the swelling; and keep in mind that you do not hurt the nerves of the anus.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the second dose is taken, pause for a moment in the next quantity of the drug that you have wrapped in the Egyptian mud; and take it for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or if you take any and thrust it into water and powder it over it according to the way you use it and use it for you; and if the glove has already been inserted, then cover that piece with what you have broken and replace it with another piece of that which you wrap in a cerot that is red or orange, when the plague is cured; and take care of that within a few days.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If you have an accidental discharge of the seed, then submerge the sponge or cloth in water and place it on the thigh, and use another remedy that restricts the flow of the seed, which is called in the book of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of asthenia that ends up in the eyes.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Asthenia occurs when the tears of the eye are deficient in some humor, and some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then, hold the points or knots that you have made with your fingers, and place them on the affected areas according to their size.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If the pain is from the vein's flow, then you should cauterize those points with a fine cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the incisions and wounds return to the original state when the cause of the pains is removed; and if the points are burned, those areas become charred and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	End of Chapter 6.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for great pain that comes to the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Watery discharge in the eyes can be caused by one of several reasons that lead to great pain and dryness, and for this reason it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of thick moisture on the outside and inside of the eyes.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is that you should consider if the pain is coming from water that appears on the outside of the eye and is not good for the whole treatment; and the cause of this is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Thus, cover that wound with that bandage, and cut it to the length of the entire member, and suspend it around that and let it hang down.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you do not know the beginning of the operation, if you do not push that you enter the eyelid with a little to a little, then you will not notice in this case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the size is large, you adjust it with a suture; and care for that entrance that is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is scarce, do not be harmed by that for that which remains of the gout, restore that and regenerate it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the enlargement declines to the parts of the eyelid, you must superficially touch those parts, then see the eyelid and suspend the enlargement on one, another that you order for the incision, and press it firmly all around, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, it will not be noticed in the same cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And before the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and cure the place with this that is regenerating as soon as it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The cure of the eyelid that has been cut.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The curing of the eyelid that has been cut is to heal the tissue that is generated in the eyelids, and especially in children, it worsens the scars of those and causes them to be in the way of their actions; and they cannot see the clarity of the sun because of these lags that are caused by them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	For these reasons, you often see those jars on the tables all day and all night; and so on the eyelids of their eyes, the swollen humid ones, which have already covered inflammation and imminence of apparent wounds in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you find that there are many perforations inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	A certain maneuver is used in that case when the thigh stops bleeding at the point where the wound is, and there is a pause in the blood flow from both sides, and it makes a circle according to the number of tissue particles contained in the whole part, and places it on top of it and presses it with your fingers all around the eye for the addition of inflammation in the circumference of the eye, and there is no fissure in the moisture that hits the incision in the flapotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Many in the cover that you push through with your hand, two in the most depressed procedures, arcernach through fissures according to the form of white glass.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When you do not adjust in the fissure for that which prevents the stomach acid from reaching the bile and causing discomfort,
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see the beginning of the fissure, then adjust the fissure with a small tool that can easily enter the abdomen; and extract that which has been said; and submerge the drapes in water and wet them over the location and stretch out those am polvils.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	When the surgeon takes hold of the suture and pushes it back into the cavity, it is because he wants to remove those remains of humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cares for that part which is becoming healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If you happen to hit the location of the scar, then you should care for that part by applying plasters inside that becomes healthy.
Capitol .xi.	Capitulare Bollandae.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the hands of the touchers of the heel.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the skin of the heel has become wrinkled and natural hairs are replaced by unnatural ones, and it looks like tears constantly fall from it, as if the eyes were weeping and the eyelids were being softened within which destruction of the heel is caused, and it is called tactiling of the heel, then you should cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what is said in the capitulum of cauterization; or it is made smooth by incision and suture; or by cannas according to what you say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	When the tears of the eye fall on the edge of the eyelid, they are incident upon the superior margin of the lacrimal major; and then extract the eye and place the eyelid flat over the eye, and cover it with a small cloth or drapery, and press it gently against the eyelid, and let it remain there as long as it is comfortable.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, I believe that the figure refers to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for which reason it is diversified among men, and of those some are such that they require a great deal of inscription on the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then apply the substance over the two lines that you have described, and begin from the superior margin of the lacrimal major to the inferior margin of the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural pits, it should be as large as the largest of the king's eyes.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the needle in one of the two angles of the corset, and remove all of it, and adjust the two corners of the labia to the gum or fine wool of the eye, and cleanse the sand, and make it adhere if there are any superfluities on the fringe over two folds on certain causes, if you wish to do so, and otherwise, do not care.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	When you have approximately closed the suture of the wound, it should be completed within three or four days, and then care for that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you wish, close the suture of the wound, and care for that as follows: if the wound is healing and not weeping, then close it with a seal and add to it; less suture is better, and thus it is easier to unravel.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, there is concern about the thigh, and it is good for the operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method is to unravel the wound, and it seems that the eye appears as if it were a small hole of death, and then raise the eyelid three times in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this, then keep the corners, and do not cut them, then take a ring in which there is thread and put it on the side of the figure, and enter the other one in the larger lacrimal, and the other in the smaller lacrimal, and adjust the eyes between those that you have equalized, and at the same time raise the elevator engulf, raise the entire chain over the side where they look as if they were cut.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When it comes to adjusting the mouth of the wound caused by the plague with a suture, and treating that part which is in need of healing.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you happen to have an aphthous ulcer or a fissure, that ulcer must be dressed with your own pus or the discharge from it, and it must be cleansed.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some people have eyes that become red because their eyes are converted, then know that you use in that case what they have said about the suture; less suturing is needed in such cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cleanse the mouth of the wound caused by the plague with a suture, and treat that part which is in need of healing.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you convert the eye and separate the figure that is given according to what I have found; and properly, use cannas or small needles of the kind that are long in proportion to the length of the eyelid and the breadth of their ends is equal to the breadth of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already inserted at the ends of each part, the one where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then cut the gout, and properly care for the wound when it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When solidified, the eyelid is raised and the eyes do not pungent.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of the cannulas that you make following this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has the quantity of longitude and latitude, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	The elevation of the eyelid's edges in the eye is caused when the eyelid is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the eyelids are not natural, hard and sharp, and pungent at the edges, you perform the operation on it by holding it gently with a subtle grasp and placing it on a soft leon, and accordingly adjusting the extremities of the eyelid and the noses in your hands.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	When measuring the length of the fingers of a certain quantity, it is necessary to use a ruler.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And if you want to cut another finger of the same thickness later on, and trim the ends of that one, then do so.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And place the patient in the best position possible, and make sure that the tool you are using is suitable for your work, as it should be a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And insert the needle into the eye of the adjusted part that requires an anchor, and make it penetrate deeply into the eyelid as far as it goes out from that part of the natural pelvis.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And pull the pelvis inside that part and insert the other in the joint, and there should be one or two or three, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And pull your hand out that the pelvis is not stuck in the eyelid that is aligned with the natural pelvis.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If you are not pulling the eyelid away and the pelvis is not stuck, pull the eyelid away from the parts that you have cut in the finger that you have measured, as soon as it is sticking in the wound of the injured part.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	When you see that the wound is healing, take out the stitches and leave the wound open, and let it be for two or three days, until it adheres to the place and covers over the good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the wound is not healing quickly, you should adjust a longer natural gauze pel, and elevate it at that, or if it appears to be along the space within approximately three days, and then you should lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of pterygium that appears in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the wound is pterygium, and the eyelid contracts when it is pressed, either on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the plague or section or cauterization, and this is called herpetic, and this is either natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of the plague or sections or cauterization, or in appearance like that.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the glove of the operation in you be that you force that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and leave in it as you enter between those two machines of drape of li, and tie them when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	When you do not want to use medicine for the patient from the causes that dry them out, consider this: if you do, it may return to excoriate pus that has not been heated at any time in the fire.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in those causes that soften the skin and moisten the water with which the hair and semen of him are washed, or it may be urine, which is liquefied from some of the oils, and immerse in that the meca, and care for that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the store of your medicine is that you pierce all the parts that are not solidified according to the form that the fire has at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which has been said is not any correction of the cautery that does not return the form of the place according to the fire at the beginning.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 124.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of cautery which is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This cautery which is made in the eyelid, which is truly called cautery; and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	When an accident occurs due to a plague or a cut or by cauterization or other similar methods.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The pathway of the operation for the patient is that you take a ring in which it makes double, and fix that in the flesh, and that the skin passes from the labial of the left to the labial of the right, entering that fil passes through the extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh to the parts desired by the ring and cut it with that ring, and insert it into the wet soap.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so if you return the figure of the eyelid as it was before, and if not, take the lens and place it on the figured part, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the extremities of the two fissures of the two angles of the incision, which you made inside where they meet, and that angle is inside where they come together with that figure of theirs.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek script: the letter Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And cut off the skin to the extent that the edge of the cut is from the eye, so that it closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and make them as close as possible to the thread of wool; and then care for those who have said that the mollifying medicines and the baths have made them better.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the cauterization is done through a fissure or suture or point, then you should know that you should make a flat cut over the eyelid according to what is previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the bath between the two lips according to what has been said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the end of the speech about the cauterization treatment, when it is done or finished, that runs in the operation, according to what has been prepared by the form of cauterization, and that is in the form of various motions.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artificer saves all the time to prepare engines in each hand that is possible to enter when it returns the figure to the natural form, or part of it, and that is according to what is convenient for the operation and the tools in the larger positions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol.xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in some men who have solidified the eyelid under the albumin of the heel, and it is prohibited from the ease of movement and their natural works, then you should enter the extraction of the ray after removing the eyelid, and raise it upwards or extend it upwards.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And if you insert the adhesion of spumon under a subtle one, which is not in sharpness of the incisions, it has obtuse a small part so that the thigh does not become anxious about the operation, and keep the spumon that does not affect the heel's acuitat.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And if your incision is those that excorge that adhesion after it is returned to its natural form of the eyelid and that the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And if you put in the heel salted water that you wash; or distill in it dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you separate between the eyelid and the heel a calgua of li, and place on the heel a nourishment in album of huou, and the third day use for the causes consolidative that it is cured.
Capitol .xvi.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in Latin, It
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	This line translates to: "Of the scar and eminence of the eye's cartilage.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that unguent is applied with two fingers, or one, and appears as a subtle, dry substance; or it is not nervous, appearing as a white, moist substance that, when touched with the finger, tends to stick to it and is then cut off, leaving the finger without adhering to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	When you start the special process, it does not begin until the lacrimal major is entered, which gradually covers the eye and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The hand of the worker in the incision of the patient is that it pauses the head in the highest position, and then works on the eyes, lifts the eyelid to your hand, and closes the ungla am onci of little duplication and extends it to the parts below.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take an eye-dropper and enter it into the eye of a horse, a donkey, a mule, or a semblant, or a rod of iron, or double the end of the eyelet little by little and place it in the socket of the ungla, and insert the ungla into the eye, and press it against the ungla; and extend it to the parts below, and scrape off the head of the ungla which is near the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And do you continue that with the eye at the end of the rod.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And you insert the romanent into the groove of the lacrimal that is sputtered or has small forfices, and lays the flesh of the lacrimal natural by so that by inserting the romanent it does not cause continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	When someone asks if the doctor has seen the joint that extends or is extended, as they have said, and has been cut, and this is the form of the following:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	When guarding the eye, do not touch the corneal membrane and ensure that the pupil is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Apply the incision in the head with a little salt or a few points of iodyl, and let that enter into the other day; and care for that as soon as it is healthy.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the wound is not nerve-endings and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it placed in that place, then this type of wound is cured by medicine, and it is healed as you are advised in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then open the thigh and press the eye gently with a sharp knife according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarified and confugated and goes into the other day, then distill from your ora in the head of the iodyl or am cief rog or am sal trissat, and fill the hole on the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And you should proceed with the operation once it is completely necessary for the patient, unless it is contrary to the postmortem cautery being in the wound, and then you can proceed with the postmortem cautery entering the wound, and afterwards treat the wound.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And you should proceed with your operation over that part as soon as it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the rupture of the lacrimal membrane is found in the wound for great harm, it should be suspended on one side; and a part is inserted into that one place, and does not finally close the opening so that no fluids of lacerations come out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And you should distill from the lacrimal gland and make a solution if it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of alghazel and of that which comes from the adjusted flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the wounds of aloes, flesh is made from the adjusted lacrimal gland, and it is placed over the pupil or applied or stretched over the eyelids and the eyelids are closed at the edges and assembled at the border of balaustra.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The first source sentence translates to:
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	If your incision is at the location where you were instructed to make it in the umbilicus, or if small pettes are used that are attached to the cord as soon as the form of the child appears, this is the proper method for this capitol.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Once the incision is closed and the entire wound is covered with gauze, you must sprinkle some salt on it, or pour some alcohol on the powder and make it resemble the medications that are corrosive, and place a bandage over the wound after ensuring that there is no infection.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If you are facing any cause of inflammation and the wound is sanitized with cauterization and you fear cauterization, then clean the wound and treat that inflammation as soon as it appears, and repeat this operation after it is healed, and similarly, make adjustments to the skin that has occurred in the wound of this special.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, I advise you to completely cure the wound of the hollow by natural or accidental means, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	1. "Capitol xviii." translates to "Chapter eight
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	2. "De colleccio de sabel en le huel" translates to "Of the collection of sable in
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	3. "Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias" translates to "If the sable veins that are hardened on the skin and prohibit the operation of the vein, and develop the skin over days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Thus, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider which part is painful and if there is no other ailment in that part, then you must close that wound.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And is it that you command the thigh to hold the head upright, and suspend those veins in front of the second or third bone according to your prudence; and this one is a subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or so do two bones gradually in a line according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And if you close those veins with great subtlety, with subtlety, and remove the scent at the appropriate time, when you see those veins being improved by the wound and becoming more relaxed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to open the wound with the feet; and if your operation is done in front of the sole, and all the veins are closed in your operation, and none have been made except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed your operation, you must distill in the head of the greenest or reddest ointment or ask that it be as sharp as the wound is improving by the scar.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If this is not possible for you to completely close it at that time, and you apply all of it that gives relief from the pain, and let it be for several days after the pain has subdued and assurance has been given of no apostematous fistula.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat over it the second time when it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Capitulum XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing the head of a child to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat the head of a child with cauterization or acute medicine following the narration of the pain and it is not healed, you do not operate on it but only apply pressure on the apostematous fistula, and remove all the moisture that is in it and let it enter when the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is discovered, and sometimes in corruption or blackness, you then cut it with a tool of this kind:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is made of sharp iron, and it is made to be heated, and it is the cap that is red and as if it were painted with mercury or alicalkaline by small points (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	When you pause that over the corrupt location of the bone, and then rotate it between the teeth, and press your thumb little by little inside until you know that this corn is dry.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	If it is some warts, and then restore the place with causes of dryness and tightening.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the place is consolidated and good flesh grows in it, and the body of the wound becomes healthy and free from infection for forty days, and it does not re-open or become inflamed, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	However, you should not be in the wound except to reduce the fissure to the shape of a nose, and then follow this method: and it is that you will discover from second bones or from acute medicine, and when you discover this form, you should pull third bone according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The exit of the triangular iron, and it should be the first extended to the extreme ascent as many times as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that over the bone, and it should be the lacrimal; and along the tube of your thumb, and then rotate your hand a little, and press your thumb into it as it penetrates all the bone, and it will feel the pain as if it were burning with fire because it is disappearing.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you must restore the location of medical static-drying substances as you have been instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	If the flesh and bone are enduring pain, then you should return the matter that has spread to the surrounding parts to its original position, so it is placed over the thighs.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reducing the elevation of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel is elevated to its full height and does not cause any harm or decrease in walking, you should loosen the thigh strap, and continue to follow it, and place your hand on the cervix, making sure that the scarification is good; and place a liniment on the heel that is made of acetic aloe, sarsaparilla, and sarcocolla, and tighten the bandage over the heel with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the powder for the poultice is what you take from the four corners of the leopard's tail, and each corner is doubled; and make those four.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And continue those powders one on top of the other according to the amount that the heel needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And press firmly on those hard areas with a strong pressure; and repeat the windings around his wounds' exudate; and remove the windings and tighten the thread the day before and the day of the operation.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If the ligament is softened, then you must make it straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And remove the ligament according to the day and the day before as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the exudate has already been reduced, then so be it, and otherwise, repeat the plastering on the powders and the stricture and the windings as soon as it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the section of the superior eyelid.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the superior eyelid, and it becomes elevated and protrudes outside the eyes as if by a gradual slope, and its shape is distorted, and you wish to insert the operation, then follow these steps: insert the needle into the edge of the eyelid from the part where you left off, and insert another needle into the double part of the lacrimal, and make it penetrate and tighten the first needle according to its disposition; and insert the location of the double needle and raise that part of the eyelid in the circuit of the needle, and press that point.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	When you have removed the shoe and placed it on the floor, insert your hand inside the wound and enter as soon as the thread comes out of the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And treat the wound with this that it may be comfortable for you when the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some gauzes are made of the whole part that is in a circle around the wound, and it should be perforated with a small punch at the top of the wound, and let the moisture get to the abdomen, and lower the wound and enter as much as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And stretch it as much as possible when it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of galls.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This malady, which is called gall, is not the same as that which is adjusted in the wound, resembling water coming down and not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The most difficult part of the work is that you must sew the wound on the dressing and dry it, and keep it from coming out of the parts you have sewn, and let it be dry and not descend, and leave the light, and this wound will see its causes as they come.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not go down below, you know that it is wet.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent to the anus is not prepared, as they have said, then make the thighs separate and place a small amount of ointment under it and apply it over the conjunctiva of the cornea in the cornea (within the area you are in), and if the anus is forgotten, then apply it.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then if the anus is forgotten, then you distill in the water tail in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already built fig and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And this treatment is appropriate if it cures the other causes within which it is healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment of the water descending from the tail.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	As they have said the specifics of the water in the division and what convinces to declare, then follow that second for the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the thighs separate over a cushion and the hind part of the horse, the strong one.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then pause a little above the eyelid of the hind part of the horse, if the horse is the one where the water is; or on the other side, if the horse is the left.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	When it is necessary to apply pressure to the affected side of the body, whether it is the left or right, do so with your dominant hand.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then pause the extremity of your hand near the crown of the head, just below the greatest bone in the album of the hinge of the lacrimal bone, and then hold your hand with the thumb and index finger.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then insert your hand into the album of the hinge and feel that the thumb and index finger have already been pressed due to the cause of the pain.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	If the measurement of your thumb is greater than the size of the pupil that enters the space within the neck, and that is at the end of the hinge; then you will see that the pupil is in the vision of the hinge due to the clarity of the corneal membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then pause your hand in the location where the water is, and then look down at another eye, and if the water descends so much, you will see that the intestine has been placed on the side of the hinge that has the most space, and your thumb is on the hinge.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And if a little blood comes out, then you should quickly leave that other wound alone that is not yet filled with blood.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when you are safe and not bleeding, then quickly remove the dressing with ease, and replace it with a new one every few days, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt from gemma in the water; and rinse the wound with clean water or rose oil infused in almond or egg albumen, and let it dry the wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	We know that those who have passed on are from our time who have tried to help with egg albumen.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey my advice to moisten the wound with water because of its hardness — which is true for many men whose skin is hard — then I advise you to take the saliva that comes from the mouth of the snake, as follows:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 And then pierce that conjuncture with it, and do not leave your hand in the wound, and do not be afraid to add more dressing if needed.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then he entered with great caution after they had said that.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	Your complement on your work is very well prepared for the sleeping patient's comfort, and it should be placed over the right side of the body in a dark place, and should be completely motionless.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the gout so that it is lined with its own nature, and do not let the side or opposite part come out.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And it should be the limb according to its position on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And it should be moved away from that in that dark place and exposed to the light seen, and it should be returned to the limb on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not think that you have done this at the time of the curers or too much with the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It is believed that you have removed this by you because the water has fallen on it with great and violent regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you have an aphthae cauterization, it is believed that you should move the hail away from the seventh day and correct that which causes aphthae.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you examine the patient's face and put your hand on their mouth to control their breathing for a few days, it exists in the most dark place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And his groan grew louder and he spoke in his own words about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	You know that in alchemy, it is not excused the disciple of vision who sees some wonders, and you should be concerned about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to our notice from the alchemical art, and the alchemist said that a fire is made in the Airy Magna perforation where the water succeeds.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I believe that you have not seen this in our land, nor has it been written in any of the ancient free books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of Airy Magna over which those who ignore them act:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of gold or iron, and their external parts are shaped according to this subtle triangle, the sharp end like that of this form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol.24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of the flesh nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are different cuts of flesh made from which one of them is assembled to Scorpio of motz pes, or to polyps; and this malady is called polypus in similarity to that represented by that peer.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	When the flesh of the carcinous part is black and the flesh of the leon is not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, if the flesh of these parts is not cancerous or fraudulent, then place the intestine between your hands and pinch it, and pick up the thread at those places in these parts.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And take out that which is in the damaged part and cut it at that point where you have understood from one of the parts that the whole flesh has remained; if Roman by that cause for which the abscess is possible, then you should remove that at a point where the instrument is easy to enter into that part because of its Roman.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If Your Grace has sin or accidental aphcema, then you should stop at that point; if it is of the malignant aphcemas, then you should cauterize that where the sac is sanc and the whole flesh is left without cavities.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And if your wound is in the nose, then it may be agreeable or uncomfortable or painful.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	When the nose is opened and the procedure is performed with humidity inside the palate, you will know that it has been cured.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate further than the cover, you will know that you have cut off the flesh from the bones of the nose that did not heal by cicatrization.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you cover the opening with your finger, moisten it with water, and pause between each part of the quantity of this or that, and enter the anus and insert one end of the rope into the nose as far as possible, by the ear or another cause that may be possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And if this has been done, that the aromatic odor enters the canals of the nose and is placed on the goliver, which many women see as this action makes children sick in schools, and it is a cause for that which he wants to do.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And pause the two extramits of the flesh, one end that exits over the nose and the other that rings in the nose, and apply pressure on the flesh that is in the nose with a bandage, and know that the flesh has been in the nose.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	When extracting the tooth, and pause at the nose prop the abstract of the sinus one calgua, and let it there for three days or more until the whole root is completely exposed that is located in the bones.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	At the end of the cure, pause at the nose a canula of plom for these days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you need more cure than given, use that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge fazedor who has distillatz olis and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make of silver or of gold, the which is similar to a little lantern uberta, it is as small as a little conqua, and the matter seems.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a canula closed as a cana, and the canula of the instrument a capipurge fazedor is flat, discovered; the which is manubre in lo derier of it, at the which you hold that when you scrape in the oli or water that you want from the sucs and from the causes suctiblas.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This sentence appears to be a recipe for making medicinal preparations using various ingredients. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Capitol .xxv.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not a complete
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not a complete sentence or a coherent thought. It seems to be a mix of words and
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not a complete sentence or a coherent thought. It seems to be a mix of words and phrases that do not form a meaningful statement in any language I am familiar with. Could you please provide more context or clarify what you are asking? I'm here to help!
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not a complete sentence or a coherent thought. It seems to be a mix of words and phrases that do not form a meaningful statement in any language I am familiar with. Could you please provide more context or clarify what you are asking? I'm here to help!
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not a complete sentence or a coherent thought. It seems to be a mix of words and phrases that do not form a meaningful statement in any language I am familiar with. Could you please provide more context or clarify what you
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not a complete sentence or a coherent thought. It seems to be a mix of words and phrases that do not form a meaningful statement in any language I am familiar with. Could you please provide more context or clarify what you are asking? I'm here to help!
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the inflammation is from the lion's bite and not from cold color, and sometimes it can be in totality of that, then you remove the intestine and insert into that part fear, and cure the location as it is and return to it when it is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the nose and lips and forehead when the continuity is dissolved by plague or apparent cause.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when a solution of continuity is found in one of these cartilages, it is not enough in the operation for all men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when to anyone of those causes you consider if it is fresh plague with the Lord's grace, and you adjust the lips of the plague according to the sutura, and cure that inside when it is healthy.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each is found healthy, then you know that you must remove each part of its apparent cartilage inside when it is not saved by the Lord's grace.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	When the wound is properly adjusted to the shape of the lips and tightened there, and over it, powdered dragon's blood and other consolidated ointments are applied, and a layer of plaster is placed on top, either of the same kind or of another consolidated ointment, and it is left on for two days or three, and then it is removed and the plaster is changed and it is applied to those parts that have healed, so that they may become healthy again.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The thread of the suture is what you add to the solution of continuity or to the holes that have been recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity to the thread that you have and know how to make.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of extracting those causes that cause pain in the lips.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	There are often seen in men in the parts of the lips that are bitten by women, hard nails resembling those of pigs, and some are soft and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Thus, if you cover the lips and foreskin of each of those hard parts, and then fill the site with clean water up to the point where it is tightened, and then wash it with clean water that is antiseptic, within which the wound is located, and then treat it with clean water that is properly antiseptic, within which the wound is located, it will become healthy.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol, Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision made in the adjusted flesh in the gingival.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great number of veins run over the adjusted flesh of that part which the ancient albus called, if you cover it with something or have it in your hand, and cut it off at its root, and let the sinus run or the wound, then the poison will run out or the wound will heal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then pause over the site that has been tightened or another sterile or antiseptic powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily and cauterize it, and make sure the cauterization does not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol, Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	When the toothache is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the entire body, it is customarily
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the toothache is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the entire body, it is customarily called "toothache" by doctors. If the gums are inflamed and the teeth are sensitive to touch, it may be a sign of gingivitis or periodontal disease. In such cases, it is important to seek medical attention promptly.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, you should cover the patient's thighs with a cloth and place the head of the needle in the middle of the fold, and then remove the needles from the teeth that have become affected by those hard and rough surfaces, and that no longer serve any purpose. In addition, it may be necessary to remove other teeth that have been damaged or affected by other causes.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if you have completed the treatment, it is complete; and if not, continue the treatment on the other teeth on the next day and the following days until you reach the desired result in which you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the teeth have required different types of cuts and figures, depending on the preparation of your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For this first source sentence, I will translate it as follows:
Capitol .xxx.	The first line of the text is "Capitol .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	The second line translates to "Removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	The third line translates to "Make sure you cure the tooth of its pain completely at all times and in the entire removal process, as there is no cause that satisfies the vein with the withdrawal of the tooth, as something sublimates within when it is excluded from the removal of the tooth.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	The fourth line translates to "When the thigh is in the process of removing the tooth, you must be certain that the painful tooth is the one being removed, as the veins are affected by the pain that comes from the thigh and it is the healthy tooth that is removed, and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have seen in the operation of the beards.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	The fifth line translates to "So, how do you certify that the painful tooth is the one being removed, and that you know, that you can cut in the circuit of the tooth as much as possible, within which it is dissolved from the gum of the entire part, and after that, those things that are said or forged subtly at the beginning, little by little, until it converges.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And if you want to speak clearly or cut well, and put the end of the foot between the thighs that hold the one you grasp, and cut the dent secondly in the hand that does not touch that, nor the greater pain in the other.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if you do not forget, take one of those instruments, and place it at the end of that part with ease and effort to remove the one that was made at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the dent is cut or burned, you must make sure that you carefully uncover that and gently stretch it at the end of the subtle part so that it is not trapped in the moment of your constraint over that.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And make sure you work with great care in the circuit of the entire part of the gum and keep your strength so that it does not touch that and remove the part from there, and return to the buttocks for the greater pain of the one.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And make sure you do not do this that some barbers in their work and audacity over the eradication of them, because they do not administer that which they were recommended; four points come to the men with large problems who are hard to be trapped, and all the pleasure of theirs is redoubled, or some of those, or that you extract that from the bones of the mandible as four points have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	When the eradication of the disease is washed with the mouth or the saliva, it is washed with the mouth or the saliva.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If the sac is flowing with blood, it is similar to the motions of the dead, and you should cut off a certain amount of the flesh and scrape over the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and pliers is subtle, as those that are badly made for the tooth at the beginning have long extratment, thin manubre and large gross, so that they do not bend when you have to operate on them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they are as times of large manubre when you enter that if those are not bent, the extratment is thin.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And there are pains of Indian iron descent pains of right extratment, and in the extratment of those there are teeth of the ones that some enter into others and are stretched by a strong constriction, and some of the extratment of those are the form of the beak of an owl which has the name of cony, it is tough, and they are of great constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	The text you provided is not in the format of a medieval medical treat
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	This line translates to: "Of the eradication of teeth and removal of bones from the crossed jaws." However, without additional context, it is difficult to provide a more accurate translation. The phrase "de erradicacio de dentz" could be interpreted as 
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the eradication of teeth that are crossed in the Roman way is necessary for some reason, you should place your hand over the area and press or hold the extramitats (roots) of those that are assembled at the beak of an animal called a ciconia or guanta. The form of the forceps is as follows:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	When the symptoms of joint pain are caused by external factors such as cold or wetness, they may be similar to those of gout. In this case, it is important to seek medical attention and consult with a healthcare professional for proper diagnosis and treatment.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not follow my instructions and use these forceps or tweezers incorrectly, it is possible that you may injure your finger or damage the entire tissue and the instrument that has been named by its creator. In this case, it is important to be careful and use the tool as intended to avoid any further damage.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	If the end of the tool is large and thick, but not smooth or rounded, it may be uncomfortable to use and could cause discomfort or injury. It is important to choose a tool with a smooth and rounded end to ensure comfort and safety while using it.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the finger is forgotten, it is not a problem; otherwise, help me with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the first instrument has a triangular extremity in which there is any large piece. In this case, it is important to use the correct tool and follow the proper technique to avoid any further discomfort or injury.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second instrument has a triangular shape with a subtle end. It is important to use this tool carefully and follow the proper technique to avoid any further discomfort or injury.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	I have already helped you with this instrument, which has two ramps and the following shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And I have other instruments which I will use for grinding teeth; four methods are made in this instrument which is similar to this one, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	When the sharp extremity of a triangle is at its thinnest or shortest point, which is any large part and not rounded, it is not used for trimming because it is not triangular.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing you should know is that these tooth pliers look and seem like the other tools.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled artisans are often lost in their craft, following the instructions of those who came before them; four are diseases for which the ancients did not know or use specific instruments because of the different forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is rounded or if it is swollen, then it is necessary to be careful about that in its place as much as possible, and it is convenient to use the instruments and forceps that have been mentioned in the removal of teeth, and this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any small swelling little by little, and it is held or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak through because the whole bone is forgotten; and then restore the place with appropriate medical care as much as possible.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When there is a small pit in the bone, you should mark that spot and its corresponding nerve, and treat it by entering through that point when it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth are not in line with the natural course of the body, and especially when they are in women and particularly in virgins; therefore, it is necessary to consider: if the tooth is nothing else but another tooth, and it is impossible to extract or apply a linament, then you should treat that one. However, if it is not anchored to another tooth, then you should insert this one into this instrument of which this is the form; and it seems like a morsel of pork, and it is made of Indian iron of sharp extrinsic quality.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And is your insertion at the point where you insert it for too long periods due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not a part of another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is expelled to the lip, then you should line it with the iron of India of which this is the form.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	The first source sentence translates to:
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And cut those lines that are in that part of the body, and take those that are sharp from the razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If the tooth is that which has a part that is cracked and the tongue enters it, then you should cover that with your finger that the edge of that fragment is not exposed and not eaten, and it is filled so that the tongue does not get into the language and the word does not rot.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of bad teeth, it is suitable to use gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth in front are concussed and displaced by percussion or striking, and the jaw cannot bear over that hand, and you have treated that with medicinal stitches, and your treatment has not worked, then you should use gold instead of silver, because silver does not rust and is suitable for those that are strong and not made of gold, but argent changes color and becomes dirty quickly.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And it is the true subtlety and greediness according to the quantity that enters between the teeth; and the form of the mold is that you hold the metal and hold twice as much between the healthy teeth, and as much as possible, the tortuosity of the metal between the bad teeth, or if it is a wire or a mesh, enter that the thread goes through the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then continue the treatment by entering the part of the body where you began, and firmly but gently apply your hand to know if it is suitable.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And if your hand is too tight, then loosen the teeth of the teeth that did not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess of the tooth with forceps or pliers, and add those to any location where you need to handle them, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the bad one so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then apply that which is strained like this.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it slips or breaks, hold it tight with that or those in another way for the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the incision of healthy teeth and bad teeth, like this many times these ladies:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return a tooth or tooth to its place in the corresponding locations and are regrown as recommended, and they become stronger.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	If some bones are suitable for cattle, and they are formed like teeth, and are placed in a location where the tooth is deficient, and are strengthened as they have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the insult to the language that is spoken and forbids the speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This language that we see some bones or is natural to the language of which man does not know, or accidental and accidents caused by the which has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is to make a hole in the thighs, and if there exists one in the upper part; and raise the tongue, and insert it into that language nerves according to the latitude where the tongue has been released from its recent state.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or denotation in that, and it has been consolidated by plague, you must cut it off and divide it according to the latitude where it has been cut into the language and the node has been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	When you look, do not see if there is a painful fissure in the skin of the flesh and if it spreads to the arch and if fluid comes out of the sinus.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And wash the skin of the incision with warm water or with salt or with clean water; and then stop the tongue lingua; it is made in that way that holds the thigh in place, so that it is not reconstructed by another view.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If fluid comes out of the sinus, place your hand over the area that was cut; if the sinus is empty, make points on the area that needs to be cauterized with a pointed cautery that fits well.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And this treatment is for other causes that are not healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitulum .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	After the removal of the gallbladder, place the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some views come out of the tongue after the operation, which prohibit the tongue from doing its natural function; and it is magnified when the mouth is opened.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in the tongue is that the mouth of the thighs opens to the side and considers the aphthae.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see the dark or black color of the skin, hard and not giving way to the pain, do not touch that part which is swollen.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it becomes white, with humidity, you should put the candle in it, and insert a small piece of spumy substance, and insert the entire part; and if you find it at the time of your operation, you should pause for a short time, which is suitable for the candle, as long as it is not too much for the candle.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And return to your work when you have washed it with the complement of the candle, and when it is rinsed with water; and care for that which is in the other care when you are done, as soon as it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an abscess from the ear and of that which is nothing in the groin and of the other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you open in the groin a cyst, it is glands that are assembled together with cotton, which become deformed and are hairy hairs of the ear, which when you treat them according to what has been said in the division and they are not healed, you should consider if the abscess is hard, of black color, of little pain, do not touch that part with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is necessary to use the herb of roga and the root is large, do not touch that with iron for the flux of the sin; instead, leave it inside as soon as possible, and you or I will remove it for you.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of a white color, like silver, and its texture is fine, then that is what one would call "inscribed.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation on it is what you consider, based on your operation, whether the wound of the finger has been fully closed or if it has diminished due to some diminution; and then cut the thumb along the sole, and the tip of the finger should be in its place, and bend the mouth of the finger, and the servant takes between their hands the tongue of the finger further with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	If it is made of silver or gold, and it is fine like thread.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then how you show the tongue to the wound and display it to you, and cover that with something and fix it in that position, and pull that out into the parts that can be done.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you pull out of the casings, and then use that instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is assembled like forceps, but the extramitats of it are spiraled, so that the orifice of each of those is in the end of the other, which are sharp, and it is made of hard steel.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	When this instrument is not at your disposal, insert it into that one part of the body where this is the form of the pain: If it is sharp in one part and not in another, then it is a sign of gout.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	If you have inserted honey, insert the other immediately after this gauze hand that you used to insert it, and then the insertion should be cleaned with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you see that the flux is not stopping, clean it with water and then treat it as if it were one of the causes of stitching. If the flux does not stop, then treat it as if it were one of the causes of stitching.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some veins may be seen in the groin or other parts of the body, and insert them immediately after the insertion of the honey-like substance in the groin of the melliferous cushion.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And if you have already treated a woman with an hematoma that was in the groin of her thigh, which hematoma was dark in color, had little sensation, which had closed the groin of her thigh, and the woman was breathing straight, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking and water, and had been dying for a day or two, then treat it as if it were one of the causes of stitching.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	When the aposteme had already suffered so much that it had made two gashes inside, one on each side.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then take care and remain in one of them, and draw out the other, and cut it off with a sharp edge, and insert it into the larger piece, and carefully open the mouth of the other wound, and take hold of the tongue, and carefully insert it into the aposteme.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you may cut out a large portion of it, and do not run the risk of losing much blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Indeed, the gout of that woman was very severe, and she drank a great deal of wine, so you should continue to insert the aposteme needles into her for a long time, and the other aposteme will be in its place when it is prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you should heat and cauterize the gout of that woman, and then do as follows; and you should walk around and not let it be known that God has done this for that purpose.
Capitol .xxxvii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a language that
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the scar of a wound when it is closed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the throat, and it is long-lasting and rough, then it is called a "bulla" when it is in the bulky and round part of the throat.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the swelling has been reduced and it is not comfortable, and sometimes it seems that the abscess has already exited but is hidden, then look at what you have inserted into it; and if it is in that direction, and it bleeds, with a dark or black color, and no pain is felt, then you should cover the incision of it, as there is fear of the thigh.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that the second hand is following the white and long one that you have told about, that you are pressing on the thigh and press the tongue of the other with the instrument that processes its form and places the hole in the new one, and pull it down and insert it into one of two instruments that are called in the insertion of two mells.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And cover that with something else but this that is adjusted over the natural term, for if you insert it more, you will lose the sound of speaking.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	When preparing for the incision, use the one that has been recommended in the incision of two millils, and care for that which is within that which is healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the thigh were terrified by the sharpness of the pain, it is certain that you would use an iron in the cauterization of the wound, and the end of the cautery in the thigh would not be anything but a sharp flame, and that you pause the head of the thigh in the top se, and press the tongue of the instrument that they have said with it, and press the water that they have told in the cauterization capital, and make sure that this is alive, and stop it not thin nor subtle, and from that fill the concavity of the instrument that this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Shall the extravitation of the cavity be where it is paused the medicine as the cavity of a sore, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the vessel, and the thigh jagua over the side because that it corrodes saliva or mucus from the mouth of that for the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any effect on the groin of him and that descends to him.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And if you have your medicine, and express it over the uvula for the space of one hour that you see there is degraded and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, take the razor and wrap it around the end of the toe, and submerge the razor in the medicine, and insert the toe into the canula through which the razor adheres to that canula, and make as many punctures as you can until you get the desired effect from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it for about three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you instruct to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and remove the cauterization from the circuit of the grape with the razor inserted in the border, and modify that water which is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash it with fresh water, and treat it externally with antiseptic, and remove the guarguarismes inside when it is healthy.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This remedy for cure is saved that I inserted and left it for a long time in fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some ulcers are cured by the grape that was inserted subtly with cauterization and incision, and it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, asafetida, orris, rue, Arabic camomile, camomile, broom, and other herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in one batch, and put them in water and let them soak for a while, and then strain the water; and the water should be drunk gently and moderately, and there should be an instrument with a cavity in the bottom of this container, on which an instrument for conquering the arsenic is placed according to this method; it should be made of silver or silver.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	When the throat is obstructed and there is difficulty in breathing, it is necessary to introduce the finger into the mouth of the patient up to the level where the uvula is located, and make sure that the uvula is not blocked.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And if you find that the area is dry, and you should not perform this castration at the end of the afterbirth, for too many women will adjust in childbirth, and it is not necessary for you to do this, but rather you must declare the childbirth of the cow.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument present, take a cane and make a closure for the cow in the extraction of the mouth, so that the patient's mouth is covered, because the closure of the cow prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this castration is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capital xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extraction of thorns and of that which adheres in the groin and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Motas veguadas adhereys in the groin or in the thorn or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	When you withdraw the gout that appears to be from those whom you have previously examined, under which catches the eye, place your tongue on the instrument's end, so that it is declared to you that this is in the abdomen.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When the cause of vomiting is not apparent and is hidden in the stomach, you should make the patient vomit to see if the food has been digested in the stomach; or if the stomach is empty, it may be due to the gallbladder being forgotten by the stomach; or if the stomach is full, it may be due to a pessary of seaweed and a lemon, and it should be emptied as much as possible, and then the stomach will empty into that location where the spines are located and the food is extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you may take a fish and drink a lot of water, and it will be digested quickly and eventually extracted; or you can take a beer and drink a lot of it, and eventually it will be excreted.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of vomiting is not apparent and has been forgotten by the stomach, you should use an instrument like a thermometer in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is large and has a small opening, and during the extraction, the quality of the stomach is easy to enter through its mouth.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	When the patient is elevated on pillows, and you hold their hands, observe which part of the neck touches the gola, so that it can be applied to the spot where the pain is located, or where the bone or spine hurts, or where the doctor believes it should be applied.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient's pain is not relieved, it may be because the doctor does not know the location of the cause and inflammation below, and removes their hand from the instrument as soon as possible, according to the amount prepared, so that it is not forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extracting annexed bones from the gola.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the physician has ordered blood to be taken from the gola, consider the following: lift the patient's tongue with your hand, and use the instrument that the physician has recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the bone, extract it gently or with subtle movements.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you cannot remove it easily, then make a small incision in the gola and insert a concave canula into it, place a heated iron at the end of the canula, and make as many piercings (while the bone is still alive and attached to the gola) as necessary, and avoid piercing the entire jaw.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	When you take a full mouthful of water and open the patient's mouth to do so, and clean the mouth with that, and do not neglect any cause and make the patient drink a glass of water every other hour as they feel the water coming in.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If you forget to do this, then inhale the vinegar or asafetida powder into the mouth with the instrument that has been recommended for the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, it is four o'clock.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another operation of suffumigation, because you take a ball of charcoal and coat it with a covering made of a piece of cloth, such as a handkerchief, and place the instrument at the end of the tube and cover the mouth of the patient's mouth with the end of the canula, and close the mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has reached the throat, because the throat is the last part.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If you do not catch it, you will iterate the subfumigation motions and avoid the thigh from being wet, eat salted foods and drinks, and do not drink water, and this diet is necessary that this regimen be outside.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument used to treat the gallbladder when seen; and it seems like forceps, but once in it there is no curve at all.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The instrument that is inserted into the gallbladder and its extremity resembles the beak of a cygnet, which is turned, in which lime is scrubbed with soap, when some cause is found, that does not allow it.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the sum of the discourse in accusation of apostasy and in section of theirs is found.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Apostasy is special movements, of manual movements, according to what is remembered of them, of each in this free one.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in perforation and section of them by hand movements, of which one is for the specificity of apostasy in itself, and therefore that we understand from the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second hand is proper to the locations where the accidents occur on the body, for the accident in the head is different from the accident in the buttocks; and the accident in the fleshy part is different from the joint accident; and each of them is treated by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some accidents are such that they do not pierce but are in maturity of the sinus in those or parts of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other accidents are such that they are not pierced but are in the maturity of the sinus when they are crushed, and they are not matured by their parts, as those that are proper to the joints, for when one joint is touched, the cause is prolonged within what can be reached in the circuit of the joint, and the nerves or limbs of that joint are corrupted, so that there is contraction of that member; or it is a proper accident of the main member, and if you delay the perforation of it within its matured tissue in the main member, or it is the buttocks, then perforate not the crushed part, but the non-decomposed feces, because it will not cause constipation but that which is proper to the buttocks, and it will elongate the parts of the dintz of the buttocks, and it will be a fistula or a fissure at the end of the member that is not cured.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the time for the incision of the appendix, and it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	If you know that the abscess is ripe when the discharge of the pain and fever subsides, and the decrease in the coma and pulse, and the sharpness of the appendix wound, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And if you know that the incision should be made at the site of the wound of the appendix and where the pus comes from the cure of the gallbladder.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the incision should be made on the neck or chest, if the appendices are in the upper or lower parts of the thighs, or in the location of the tendons, nerves, and arteries; and in all other places that do not reflect, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the appendix is in the flesh, it is better to perforate when it has been confirmed that the digestion of the second complement has been confirmed; then if you perforate at that point, the corset of the penis and the hardness of the mouth will be prolonged, and more the lips of the endured and the depth of the.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you make a small puncture, and in the large ones a large puncture and wide or slit according to the size of the apostemas.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And if you find other apostemas where the codena is cavity and fixed, when it is made that way which is usually done, it is like that of those that happen in many dubel and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those where it is cut, there are three angles; and of those that are cut there are like the figure of a mirror, like the bones of the fingers.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those where it is given, there are in the same way round and lunar cut, and seem like those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And of that which is not like those that are not like the surface apostemas, if you find that it is not like the surface apostemas, then make the puncture on the surface or flat as much as possible.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess is large and has already collected pus that perforates the skin, which does not let you close it and extracts all the poison at that time; if they manage to extract a part of it on one day and then extract a larger part the next day, and apply pressure with cloths soaked in hot water, and repeat this procedure several times until the hole is closed, it will help to heal the abscess.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	If the patient is of noble birth, or if it is a female press, or a small child, or an old man, and the animal spirit has resolved itself at the exit of the abscess, and the wound is large, then you should operate on it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take this precaution with great caution, and if you perforate the abscess in the place where you punctured the abscesses, keep in mind that you are eliminating plagues and consider whether the plague of the abscess is scarce or a flat cut; and if the abscess is large and the fissures of the perforation are wounds, then make sure you stop meca in each turn as soon as they appear.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the gangrene one part of the intestine or has been curved in that circuit, you should know that it is completed by a knife or by a string made of thread or of silk, as when you have cut pans or razors, its wetness; and stretch that inside on the third day; and proceed with that and cure the one that covers the intestines that are within which is healthy.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you happen to lose fluid during the time of your operation, you should immediately administer water and vinegar to those that have been affected, and place a cloth over the location of the flowing fluid, and hold it there.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of the sac does not cease, you should know that you must administer regular and proper care and medication to those that I have recommended in various parts of this free and divided land.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the place of the abscess is located in the nerves, you should know that you must wrap the powders in vinegar and oil, and place them over the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the wounds are raw, you should know that you must place damp powders with water and oil, and keep them there until the third day, knowing that you must open the abscess and cleanse it, and administer care to the sick part according to what is necessary for its healing.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And it is necessary that you know the care of abscesses universally, but less so when the type of abscess has been determined, as I have already said about all types of abscesses in what way they are cured individually.
Capitol .xli.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	The translation of "De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap." is: "From the section of girdles that come into the codpiece of the head
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	The translation of "En la codena del cap petits apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz; e las specias de lor so motas." is: "In the codpiece of the head, there are small girdles, and those of them contain tunicae that are their own factures; and the motions of theirs.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	When it comes to their women, and those that contain water like a lime,
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	and those that contain water like poles, and resemble them; and those that are hard and rigid.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must extract from those without causing harm to the arc.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 The operation in the section of those is what you should press with that instrument in the form of which it best suits, the one called an enterotome, entering if you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it is that there is water inside, then cut that am according to its length by sectioning it from the surface in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Begin in the section of line .B., going to line .G. Thus, when the water is evacuated, you cut that part that contains that water, and do not leave any cause for all, as many watched return, if Roman from that any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And if you submerge the cot in Egyptian water, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with plague and let it enter another day, as this am corrodes all that is made of that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And if you need to scrub that part with Egyptian cream according to the instructions and prescriptions of the doctor, then know that there is no other cause for that film; then care for the wound with Egyptian cream after it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the rash has thick nodes, then you should insert this next form in this way:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I am cutting without a form, and I place nails between the two lips of the cut and the end of that of the entire part, and I exert my skill in removing that tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If you have any objections, then know that I am telling you this first of all.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And seemingly, make the rash smooth and clean with the cut and its treatment according to what you have said; and if the rash is made smooth by the cut, then it is a small amount of scar tissue and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some people have acne on these rashes that are on the face of men who do not have any moisture; the cause is this and you inscribe over an acne on the face of a mature woman and make it as hard as a stone, sharp, white, which could not be sanded, and if it is on the face, it will plague that.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	When other injuries occur in the head, this is not the same capital, as the injuries that come to the heads of children and you must know the causes of these earlobes, but all of this is only a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	When you pause the opening of those who have had a low birth rate, it is necessary to treat the cause of the disease in the parts that have been affected.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply the cures that are suitable for the treatment of gout.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the sections of scrofula that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Moles visible on the neck and shoulders and armpits, and some are also visible in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the moles that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is covered by its own tunic, and it is like the nodes and moles on the head and neck, and it is like what has been recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the specifics of these scrofula are moles, four out of which are some calcareous, and of those that contain humidity, and of those that are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you see as a good disposition in the Tocament, of the color of water which is manifested is predominantly the color of the skin, and is not attached to any part, and is not annexed to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not pregnant, cover that you inscribe a superficial dry part of the part to the part of the other part of the body of the line of .G. within the line of .B., and burn that entire part, and extend the labia of the skin from one to one, or from one to two if you need those, as has been said in the moles on the head, and extract a little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	When caution is not observed, veins or nerves may be pierced.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	If the skin is not firm, that is, if it does not adjust to your touch or if it disturbs the patient, and if you insert a vein or an artery into it without needing to do so, then stop and do not use any powders that cause sneezing or other discharges from the nose, and cleanse the skin, and then press it back onto the wound to make it smooth and start to become ridged.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the suture comes out.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation after the abscess has been completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if you ask about the other small pustules, then insert those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If it is in the root of the large pustule, then do not insert that pustule into its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Remember that it is better to fold it lightly and not to insert it too deeply.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	When the swelling of the gout is filled with old humors that you have already cut out in search of Egyptian remedies, and when you care for that,
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert that entire scrophula, you should adjust the lips of the plague and cut out as much pus as possible without leaving any excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you see that there is excessive moisture on the surface of the mumps due to its large size, understand that you need to remove the root of that, and apply sutures and this is what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	If that mumps contains moisture, make a superficial hole in it at the location where you will see the maturation of the intestine, and stop the perforation until the dust settles down from the face, as they have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And when you apply sutures, use a thread that is not too thick and resembles those used for this purpose, so that it does not cause any harm to the patient.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the plague has already been washed, use a thread that is not too thick and resembles those used for this purpose, so that it does not cause any harm to the patient.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the syringe of the apostemat there is an accident with the glomerulus.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Cut off the old section of this syringe in the epilhot, and have not seen any man in our land who did that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Many men have been affected by this, as the extraction of the epileptic stone is not easily done, as it is not beneficial for the whole body and all the veins and larger arteries of the thighs are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Many are those who have had their teeth pulled, or their jaws broken, or their ears cut off, when the thigh is not in the canal, as it is necessary to hurry the cutting of the epileptic stone to avoid the loss of the whole.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want to remove it, you should cut the epileptic stone into three or four small pieces, or five by making a small incision in the middle of the piece that is between two circles, so that the incision is in the cartilage, not in the flesh, and this place is suitable for cutting, where the fat and the sinews of the bone are free.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, then doctors should extend the gallbladder as much as possible and then fasten it to the canal where it comes out, and avoid the sinews of the gallbladder if any cause them pain.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	When the wound is properly located, and it is understood over the section of the canal for the flap which is of that eye which is of the disrupted part and for the abscess of the tooth.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	The plague has been open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	In the hour when the perforation is being made, add some of the cod's bladders to the plague, and that alone will support the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And properly administer medicines that make the flesh become safer when it is healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Albucasis says that the sum of the speech which has been recommended, exposure is not but you see that the posteriors of those legs have become emaciated, and the thigh is on the verge of death, and the leg of the male is inserted, and they will inscribe the epigastric per the location of the plague for some respiration, and it will be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command the plague to be closed when it is consumed by the malady of the leprosy; and it is the malady of him for three days; and therefore you must command the plague in this way, and cure that within which is healthy.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	When you have seen with your own eyes, as I have, that a seller has a cold and is gasping for breath and has a part of the lung affected, and you were called for the cure of the patient and opened the chest like the mouth of a dead person, and discovered the plague and treated the lung that was affected by it.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then you have confessed that it had not been infected with veins or wounds, and the wind was of the plague, and treated that part which was burned by the fire.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it did not worsen the sale if it did not cough in the vote, and return to the lord's service after a few days.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now say that there is no fear in the section of the episiotomy.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section of hemorrhoid that occurs in the lung and is called hernia of the lung.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hemorrhoid, called hernia of the lung, is a large hemorrhoid after the color of the body, and is found in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	When there are two fingers, either one is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no means of cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is followed by two fingers, one resembling grass-like nodes, and the other resembling apoplexy, which is made by pressure on the artery, and there is fear of this.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not presume that this force is like iron in that which is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you advise that and investigate this according to the saying, and if it resembles grass-like nodes and is not suspended in any vein, then you insert it as the nodes are inserted, and extract it from there which contains the disease; and otherwise, you examine all the symptoms, and cure the place where it is believed to be curable, and enter if it is sane.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section of the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodes are special kinds and I have already mentioned all the kinds of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	When you recommend that the difference between node and exitus is doubted,
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And you say that exitus is heat and fever and severe pains that occur when the excess of superfluity is sedated, and it is completed by putrefaction, whereupon the fever ceases, the pain and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	When there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it counts that the leopard is in the womb of the woman, it means that the child has been born.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is second the color of the body, and the beginning of the child is like a cess and is made as a bag, whether larger or smaller, and there are two species, four of which are fats and contain water, and the colors of the water are motes, according to what you have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then cover, when you reach the cure of pain, that expounds that and inquires about it at its beginning, according to what maintains the quality that is called intromes, which will be found in the capital that is nearest to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the mane of inquiry for all asters and nodes, and that you hold this intromes and enter it into the moist place that absorbs into the aster, and you will roll the ties that say about that little by little as you know that the intromes has already entered the codena.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then your last but before the measurement of the size of the aster, and extract the intromes and consider that it is there in the style of the one.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the dryness of the current is forgotten, regardless of what color it is, you should cut it at the surface according to what I have said in the other posts.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture in the intestine's passage, you should know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If the surface of the cut is not in the form of a cross according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, and suspend the cut on that pin, and remove the entire part of the intestine as easily as possible, and keep the pelvis or sac over it and extract that sac from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If something breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and you should move quickly to this, and you should extract that part from the foot as soon as it does not cause any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If something causes pain, little or a lot, the node returns according to what has been said.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that something causes pain in a small part, you should make a plaster of some sharp, corrosive powders and stretch the plaster, and place it over the other cautery post, and cure that from another cure as soon as it is healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If the wound is large, you should cut the woman's lips and treat that as gout that enchants.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse is palpable on the opposite side, or not palpable, you should cut and humble the place where the thoracic vein is blocked and let it flow for two days or three until the plague subsides and the fever decreases; and then return to inhibit that which is causing the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the mustard necessary in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	 Of those are the forms of the infiltrations, and there are three species, which of those is the greatest, and of which is the smallest.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of infiltration that is greatest is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of infiltration that is smaller is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of infiltration that is smallest is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	 These are the causes of pain in iron, in poison, in the extremities that are gently bent, so that the infiltration is fixed in the appendages.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	This is the form of the experiences, and they are named after them, and one of those is called beric.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	It is of three kinds, four of which are large, more and fewer.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experience, the form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the lesser experience, the form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the few experience, the form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems that they are for those apostemas and exits and fistulas and abscesses which enter those of the bones and of other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And these are returned, large, leons, as great as the largest agulhas which are made of those that are closed with the shells, and are made of citrons, or of iron, or of silver, and the better ones when they are made of citrons.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And these are the experiences of the black plum, which are similar to those that are opened when the fistulas are in the cavity of those which are reflected, that are reflected by their levitation at those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	When it comes to three kinds of substances, four of their lengths, and the rest of the members, according to the size of the fistula and the stricture of the member,
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The first source sentence is in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The second source sentence is also in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The third source sentence is in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The third source sentence translates to: "The forms of the joints are of special shapes, four in number, which are simple ones, those having a single curvature, and there are three kinds: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	The fourth source sentence translates to: "And of their bones or cartilages, and of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	The fifth source sentence translates to: "And of those bones or cartilages, there are not many curvatures, and of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	The sixth source sentence translates to: "And of their bones or cartilages, there are three curvatures, and of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	The seventh source sentence translates to: "And all of this is necessary in its place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The eighth source sentence is in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
Forma de unci simple migier:	The ninth source sentence is in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The tenth source sentence is in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
Forma de unci orp gran:	This line seems to be a description of a medical tool or instrument, possibly a type of probe or
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	A "form of an enlarged needle" or "form of the tool", but without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small needle", "form of the tool
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large needle with two curves", "form of the tool
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of an enlarged needle with two curves", "form of the tool
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small needle with two curves", "form of the tool
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large needle with three curves", "form of the tool
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an enlarged needle with three curves", "form of the tool
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small needle with three curves", "form of the tool
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the scalpels used to cut and scrape the nodes and wounds, and there are three types, one being large, another enlarged, and another small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the enlarged scalpel
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extramits of those that are made with sharp scalpels and the others with non-sharp ones, and not paused in such manner, but because it is done quickly in the excision of the nodes to avoid injuring veins or nerves, and for that reason the wound heals and brings tranquility to a little extent due to the adustion which atrophies the excoriation of the wound.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of magical spells, and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, as you see in the examples.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the great magical spell:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium magical spell:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small magical spell:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These symptoms are similar to those of a person who has consumed too much alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the exterior of the pointed point that there is hidden sputum, and in that corner of the fingers and toes, when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of sputum, which are found between the teeth and the perforation of the gums and not seen by the bad eyes, are of three kinds: great, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of vomiting that are found in those who have the flow of the stomach cut off, and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small; the forms of it are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These symptoms are similar to those of lemons, round in shape, of a certain length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When it comes to these types of winds, you need to use large, smaller, and fewer doses, because those that are quickly released from the body in need, and you have to act first before medicine is available.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Do not use those winds to abscess in the entire body of the patient, and do not use them except in places where they are not found, as in the joints of the limbs and the groins, and on the joints of the breasts and the stomach and the eyes and the navel, and seem to resemble those of the carnivorous hooves.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some points are made from those instruments that resemble smaller ones, such as those used for this purpose; by which the sore is released when it is cut through by flebotomy, or you must incise a vein or an artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some points are made in this way: round.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the breasts of men who are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	When some women's breasts are inflamed, it is necessary to comment on the sleeping as if they were bearded, and the same inflammation is found in the breasts of other women, and even in those who have been circumcised, it is called a gallstone.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to follow this form, cut along the line of .B. to the line of .G., and remove all the fat, and apply the medicinal ointment evenly, and adjust the lips of the wound according to the shape of the wound, and cure that which is sick within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast is inclined towards the parts outside and is softened by its magnitude, as in women, then it should be cut into two halves and placed side by side, like the two halves of the moon, with each half containing the other, according to the line that contains the smaller one in this form of the line of .B. and .G. And remove the belly that is between the lips of the wound and the pingueza, and maintain what has been said about the suture and the powders that are necessary for the curing within which it is healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not fill in the inscription of this remedy for the restlessness of the foot and the flow of sinew, then it covers that the plague of cotton submerged in the corrosive and leaves that part which this corrosion causes to be like the gray matter, and properly cares for that part which is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a language that
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	When there is a perforation of the acupuncture points that cause pain in the foot, it is necessary to reduce the size of the hernia and place the hand over the area to prevent the int
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These acupuncture points that cause pain in the foot are of the species of scrophulas, which have a core that is removed and squeezed.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture, and those that contain moisture are those that are uncut and are seen in the lunar section according to this figure: from line .G. to line .B. And as all is evacuated, it is necessary to complete the cut and leave the entrance open for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And when the cut is made and is cured, enter that it is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the acupuncture point of the species of nodes and of the scrophulas is, and then you cut over that area as has been said in the section about the scrophulas engagement.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is extended to that which is open and bleeding, then you administer this cauterization according to what has been said in this section.
Capitol .xlix.	I apologize, but the provided text does not contain a source sentence labeled
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	This line translates to: "Regarding sections of gambling that occur due to artery or vein." However, without the context of the entire text, it's difficult to provide a more accurate translation. This line seems to be
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery bursts and the bile duct is consolidated above it, painful attacks of gout and aphonia occur due to the artery or vein: first, when the attack is due to the artery, it is added in the chest of the heart; and when the inflammation increases, it is felt in it that the aphonia is caused by the bile ducts.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	This line can be translated as: "And that which is by vein is made whole in the manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	If you make a cut on this part of the body, and especially in the areas where the ankles are, the knees, the chest, and other parts of the body; and it is very large, so that the curacy of the surgeon may be avoided, and that which is in the extramural areas or at the top, it should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	If it is about those who have inflammation of the abscess of the femoral artery, make a cut in the codena seccio in the long; and prop up the cut with uncised and prop up the artery, and clear the tunics within which is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And put on that hole and make it penetrate into the other part of the latz, and stretch the artery am double in two places, — which causes you to have trouble in extracting those arteries which are in the templars.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And puncture the location which is between two liaments and let it enter where it can scrape all that is in it, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer the curacy in which fire is made to enter where the liaments can be burned; and cure that which is made convenient for it to be entered within which is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If an abscess is caused by a vein cut, you should cover the abscess with your hand and hold it as possible to prevent further abscess at the wound site, and then introduce the needle into the location where you have held the abscess so far, and make it penetrate; and leave it in that double filth that you extract from another part of the body, and tie the abscess with a thread according to what you have told me in the grape vine of two parts of the extremities of the fillet.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you will extract the fillet, then introduce the needle into the entire abscess and stretch the fillets at four points.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Clean the abscess in the middle of it when you are there and see what is inside it, then insert the superfluous part of the codon, and leave that which is visible.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand over the powder that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and administer the cure that is made of calves and extracts when it becomes healthy.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	The first line of the text is a medical term that translates to "The capital of the apoplexy which occurs due to twisting of nerves." This suggests that the text is discussing a medical condition
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	The second line translates to "How does apoplexy occur in the artery and vein, and it seems to occur in the nerves when they are struck or overworked, and in a similar way." This suggests that the text is discussing the causes of apoplexy, which is a medical condition characterized by sudden weakness or paralysis on one side of the body.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	The third line translates to "And it is made by the most in the places of the assistants or of the knee, or in all places where there are joint pains." This suggests that the text is discussing a medical treatment for joint pain, possibly a form of manual therapy or massage.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	The fourth line translates to "And apoplexy is severe, and it appears as the color of the other cheek, and it is in the major parts of its dispositions and when it is straightly with vehemence, it sends in it the malus resembling stupor." This suggests that the text is discussing the symptoms of apoplexy, which can include sudden weakness or paralysis on one side of the body, as well as other neurological symptoms such as confusion or loss of consciousness.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	The fifth line translates to "And apoplexy is not aggravated in the preon of the chest, and by so it leaves the cord, and it is lesser at all parts and does not go to the parts behind or in front." This suggests that the text is discussing the progression of apoplexy, which can worsen over time if left untreated. The author is advising that if apoplexy is not treated promptly,
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who are in the joints do not cover that they are wrapped in iron, for it will soon cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	This is a line from the medieval medical treatise that translates to: "Moreover, that which is in the head or forehead, the codena is often sputtered." In modern English, this
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	This line translates to: "If there is a small boil, then apply that with the pointed cautery and remove it when it has opened." In modern English, this means to use a sharp tool to open and drain a small boil or pimple.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	This line translates to: "And if it is large, then cut off that part, and scrape it, and remove that; and adjust the wound to the suture, and care for that as it becomes healthy." In modern English, this means to surgically remove a large or infected growth, clean the wound, and then care for it to promote healing.
Capitol .li.	This is a Latin phrase that translates to "Capitol
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	This line translates to: "Of the incision of the boil which happens on the cheek that happens on the stomach." In modern English, this means to make an incision or cut on a boil that has formed on
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	This line translates to: "Endow with care the visible boils that are on the stomachs of those and on other parts of their bodies, those which are called fungal due to their similarity to those in the body, of which the rash is subtle and the head is large; and also the lips of those who converse, and those who are small, and those who are magnificent." In modern English, this means to be gentle with visible boils on the stomachs and other parts of the body, and to also care for the lips of those who talk, as well as any other affected areas.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	You have already seen one, and in the belly of the patient were two things that were less like functions and there was no difference between those white ones, of little importance.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were turned inside out and were being made, and moisture ran throughout that entire time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then you inserted those and pressed them tightly into the two feet. And the other one was placed on the other.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the insertion of them is that it is considered labor if the thigh is moist, and the color of the hernia is white, moist, of slight importance; you insert them with shaving, and they are in your presence cauterized in the fire, four times watched by your incision, and if you see the incision, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the thigh is painful and fearful, keep away from insertion with iron; rather, consider that you have recently made a point, and tighten that hernia, the one that they have said; and let it be for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust the constriction of the plait; therefore, do not continue to tighten the plait too much when it is already separated and falling apart by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the part is large, there is often a cause of fear and weakness, especially in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you separate the joint of the patient, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure the part when it is healed, if the boil is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And remember that you do not assume to separate the part that is of dark color, with little sensation, with a flat foot, as that is likely to become gangrene.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will come back in memory of this.
Capitol .lii.	Capitulum.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Chapter of the eminent cure of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the navel is caused by various motives; either by fissures of the caecum which is over the belly, and it comes out of the intestine or bowel according to what happens in other ruptures; or by spasm of the vein or artery according to what is said, or by narrowing of the abdomen in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	When there is pain in the abdomen due to a hernia or inflammation of the membrane, the color of the aposteme (a term used for a swelling or tumor) resembles the color of the chest; and the pain comes and goes from various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is for the protrusion of the intestine, consider the situation of that which has been found, with less diverse and more uniform appearance, and as you examine that part, return it to its place; and the more it returns, and the more it magnifies, the more you must know the inside of the belly and work vehemently.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to moisture, the pain is great and does not remain hidden when you examine your own belly, nor is it tightened, nor is it distended.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to scarring, consider these signs that the aposteme (swelling or tumor) appears black and receding.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is due to fatty tissue, the aposteme (swelling or tumor) is heavy, large and thick, and remains fixed after a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to wind, the pain of that which has been found is intense.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The first source sentence to translate is:
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	If the prominence of the navel is due to the belly or the clothing, you should command that the patient holds the navel with their hand and keeps it steady; and then, if possible, make a tent in the circuit of the navel, and command the one who was there to turn over the inside of your thighs on the navel, and surround the navel with spittle in the circuit of the navel over the place where you have placed it with your hand; and extend the thumb of the thumb nail to the parts that are far from you; and lay the fingers of the finger nail on the shoulders or on the chest.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	If the thumb of the thumb nail is extended over the arm and introduced into that sign you want to hold, and if you have not kept or held it with the arm, then pull out the hand and press the belly to the parts of the stomach.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If you have let the clothing fall, then hold that with your hand; and insert the excess into it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your arc or vein, make a circle around that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong places and insert two needles in the circuit that you made around the navel in the hand of the crotch, which threads pass; and hold the navel in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish, remove the beads and clean the area where the flesh extends and falls on itself; or insert it when it is subtle and comes out, and properly care for that part which comes from the outcropping of the wounds that are inside and are healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the eminence of the navel is of flesh or moisture, then you cover that the apothem is done as we have said and causes the wound or moisture to be atrophied in it, and properly care for that part which covers and consolidates the location.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of a sprain.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As has been said in the division, of the kind of sprain and in what manner it is treated by physicians, and that it is aggravated by the treatment if not careful; and it has been said that sprains are caused by excessive or improper treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	 And they cut off the old ones that some see sprains in the place where it is possible to eradicate them, as for crane which is in the mammillas or in the thigh and seems like the members allocated to draw all of that, and especially when beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is time and proper to treat, you may not be able to cure this for the patient nor have I seen another, nor if it has been tried before.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	In the operation on her, when it is allocated as we have said, it is because you precede and lay open the thighs and remove dark-colored blood from certain veins, and it is noted that this is if the swelling is manifestly atrophied.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And properly prepare the patient in the manner that is located in the operation location, and properly place them on the table with their legs spread apart; and carefully examine all parts of the body for any cause of the patient's pain.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And lay the table clean, and do not leave any residue, and examine the locations, and thoroughly cleanse all parts of the body with that or with an instrument that is as possible with the instruments you have.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have any objection to the use of a large incision for veins or arteries, then cauterize it within the flow of the sanc that is ceased, and carefully cure that in another cure within which it is healthy.
Capitol .liv.	Capitulum.
De curacio de ydropici.	Chapter.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	When we have recommended, in the division, of the species of gall from the water of the stomach, and the salts of each species, for the cure of the physician's patient.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not only the species of althitas alone, and not near the species of timpanists nor the species of yposarcha, but it is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this species of ydropici timpanistre with medicine and it does not satisfy your medicine, then consider that if the thigh has been made smooth, or if it is another ydropici in another thigh, as if it is stomach pain or intestinal pain, then you should keep from using iron, for fear of this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see the thigh of beauty exuberant, and it is not another thigh but ydropici so much as this, and neither child nor old, then you should know that the operation of the thigh is between your thighs, and the minister expresses the stomach of the patient with his hand, pours water on the part where the penis ends the foreskin, and presses spines in this way:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	When the two sharp points are of equal length and have a sharp end, but are short in length, so that in the operation they do not pass through the intestine and cause harm to the patient.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And whether the generation of gallstones is from the intestines, as you have to cut through the umbilicus for three inches on each side, over the pecten.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of gallstones is due to the patient's diet, then your incision should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three inches.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of gallstones is due to the gallbladder, then your incision should be on the right side of the umbilicus.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side of the abdomen that you want to operate on, so as not to cut the superfluous tissue in that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And perforate the instrument throughout the code, and enter into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the coden and the siphon, and remove that; and if it is the size of a pin or smaller.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And when the fistula has been pierced through the chest wall where the fluid will go to the desired location, and it is located in the abdomen.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and enter with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or lead, at the tip of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two of one size and one of another size; and it is the end of the instrument according to the penholder of the pen, as many times as:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And in the extraction of the fluid, the armillary sphere is used, four times when the instrument touches the fluid, therefore remove the fluid in the same amount at that time, and if you do not remove that much in the time, then the spirit animal for the resolution of the sickness, or it may be five days before death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	May remove the fluid according to the amount of the virtue of the body and according to what you consider the dispositions of the virtue of the polls of the body and of its beauty.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	You have extracted the instrument, and withdraw the urine that causes the most pain as much as possible using the catheter that is placed over the urethra, which is recommended to you to perform this operation on the other side.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the instrument on the other day if the patient tolerates it as much, and extract a small amount of urine each time, and keep doing this for several days out of fear, and tell me if you do not see any blood except for a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are afraid of the patient, and withdraw a large amount of urine, then treat it with sand from the end of the tail, wet it in water, and let it dry under the sun for a long time; and treat it with desiccating medicines if it is cured.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the sheet is placed as close as possible to the extraction of urine, according to what you have told me in writing that is prescribed.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol.lv is a website that provides information about the capital
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who were born in places where the urethra was not pierced.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	When some children have pain in their belly and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or is straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, a cover is needed for the perforation of the skin so that nothing enters from below this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then pause in the track with a thin wire of lead and tie it there, and do this for three days or until it is full.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when you want to urinate and have urine; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine that was on the place may not be covered by this clasp.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Moreover, that of which the track is straight and is treated with lead wire as has been said, for a few days until it becomes amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Moreover, those in which the track is not in its place, it is led, the cause of which is that those who were born and traveled had to cut off the end of the tail because they could not urinate in the parts below; and this generation, for so that the sperm does not reach the latter part of the rectum, and it is malnourished with that.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	In the operation of the foot, it is necessary that the thigh be raised over the patient's back, and extend the tip of the scrotum of the opposite leg to your left hand as if you were gently extracting it, and insert the tip of the scrotum of the perineum of the patient's foot into the gut of the cavum spermatozoon, just as you would with a pen, or if you do not have any part, because it looks like the tip of the scrotum and that it will fall into the patient's scrotum next to the one you are holding.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of draining the spleen, four things may happen to you; and stop there until the splenic artery is bleeding, and cure the wound inside if it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 67.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Regarding the accident that may occur in the prepuce of the scrotum, in the head of the penis, and in the testicle, as well as the adhesion of the prepuce of the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Things that are visible may happen to this accident in the scrotum, and it is prominent with fatty tissue.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	When one is malicious and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	This appears to be a medical instruction for treating an abscess or boil. Here's the translation:
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the wound is malignant, of evil color, then you should cover the incision with a piece of cloth and apply cauterization to the area around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the wound is on the prepuce of the penis and not circumcised, and one part of the wound is cutting the prepuce and the other part is torn, then you should cover the wound with a piece of cloth and apply cauterization to the area around it. You should also clean the torn part of the prepuce when you clean the wound, but be careful not to tear it further.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if there are already signs of gangrene in the genitals and black and cracked prepuce, then cover the entire area that has already been damaged and is likely to become corrupted or corroded; and place a piece of cloth over it, which is contused by flour of last year's wheat and crushed and hollowed-out.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And clean that part with the other treatment when it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is a flow of blood, then apply cauterization in the following way:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	When the cauterizing is done on two different positions, it is done on the skin and on the pus when it becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the foreskin is corrupted and destroyed entirely at once, you should know that you must insert into the meat of the prepuce a catheter for so that the urine may be discharged through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce at the head of the foreskin (and this adhesion only happens in the one where the prepuce is, and not on the circumcision; and when it happens due to pus or abscess) you should know that you must exfoliate with a soft sponge when the membrane is dissolved and the head of the foreskin is completely separated.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to exfoliate those carefully, you should know that you must exfoliate with a sponge of any kind on the head of the foreskin and the prepuce, and then the prepuce, when it is very thin, is easily perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the prepuce from the head of the foreskin by the thin part, which is already slippery in the pus so that they do not stick to another part.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And if the wound is almost healed, then apply an escharotic within it.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol seventy.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the education of children and the care of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not the solution to continuity as with other plagues: rather, it is our operation and will that makes it particularly in children, and therefore we must assign the best operation and leave those who do not benefit from health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on all free men, who did not use it in their laws, and who only acquired it through experience, which caused the major part of artisans and barbers to stop using circumcision and mundificatio am novacula and am torores; and they used false limbs and incisions.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already prohibited all these methods and did not improve mundificatio am forfexs, am liament am fiel that in mundificatio as the ungla, where motas vetz escape the codena pus desus, where the codena of the prepuce is two tunics, and roman the tonica pus dejos, and fort leu es forsat ad auttra inscizio e dolor sicura.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	When a circumcision is performed by an Alphecati, and it is digital, the one who performs it uses sheaths, but the insertion of the male organ's extremity is not securely fixed in the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, may you avoid using iron, for it can corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and there are no visible signs that require circumcision, and you have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And the circumcision that you make with forceps and limbitator is not good, the quality, as I have experienced, is described as unproportional incision, therefore, when the sharpness is like the sharpness of the end, and after making the incision, it is followed by a compression in a short time; and the compression of the foreskin covers the umbilical cord of the entire member, which does not cause any error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way of the first operation is that you make the child more by those who understand a little, which you do not only, but you let the foreskin enter into the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	When that pleasure is felt in its entirety in that manuscript which is possible for you to receive from this understanding,
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	When that part is properly placed between your hands, and is not causing any discomfort; and hide the forceps in your hand or on the side of the foot, so that the child does not see those or other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Place your hand on the thigh and inhale deeply into the abdomen, and pull out that which is causing the pain at the top of the thigh, and slightly modify that to remove any additional swelling.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Tie the knot at that point, and tie the second strand around it, and pull the first strand tight to hold it in place, and insert between two more strands.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Raise the abdomen up and lift the top of the thigh; and lightly press on the abdomen with your fingers, a little at a time, until it is more comfortable; and dust powder over it and place some on the powdered part where the skin is wrinkled by the olive oil recently applied; and place that over that entry on another day; and care for that as you would when it is healthy.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps in mythology, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The first source sentence translates to: "Some are not sharp and some are sharp, so it is not the key of the lock, and the length of the sharp points is like the length of two fingers engaged in a grip.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	When there is an error in worldly transformation, it is often the case that the internal code is entirely hidden, or a part of it is missing.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Thus, it is necessary to extend that part of your body that you are comfortable with and that is in line with the anatomy of the location, and that is equal in size.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it in your body, then take it from another part of your body and insert it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days and the anatomy is still swollen, then you should enter as soon as possible and excise that part of the anatomy with ease, and insert the second part that is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep the head of the anatomy in place, so that it does not get in the way of this operation.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And cure that part of the anatomy that has been consolidated with powders, as recommended in the treatment of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is inserted over the codename according to measure and follows the divisions thereof, then you will not notice it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And cure that part of the anatomy that has been told to be healed within three days.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitulum .lviii. (Chapter 88)
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	When treating urine that is held in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	When there is a retention of urine in the bladder, it is caused by inflammation of the bladder or by scarlet or gangrenous tissue, and seems similar to those that have spoken of the manieyras of curacio in division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved, and you see a retention of it being due to gravel which is already in the neck of the bladder, then cover the thighs with the cloth.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that above the knee and extend the abdomen from the side opposite to the foot, and the intestine stretches the abdomen as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, you should compress the neck of the bladder with expulsion of the gravel to the parts behind, so that the urine is absolutely dissolved.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If no, it is said that there is great heat over the abdomen, then cover the thighs with cold to the cause on the abdomen, and apply an extracuase from the instrument called a syringe, which is of silver and subtle leon, as follows: It is like a needle of a spindle, but subtle in its subtlety, like a palm and a thumb, to which a subtle cane is attached at the top.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	When the bladder is being emptied by that which you grasp with your hand and lies along the hair or beard for good grooming; and introduce the extramiture of the urethra into the part beyond the cringle, and insert it if any hair is left in the foreskin, then introduce it with vehemence into the canula and afterwards smooth it over and wipe it with the album.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And cover the thigh with salt, and anoint the wound with olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And introduce the cringle into facilitating it when it comes to the edge of the beard; and double the beard down at the part of the lip; and push the cringle with your thumb along that; and push that in when it comes to the vesica, and that centa should be pervaded by the cause, and do not do this order otherwise than in the meat where it would have tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And extend the urethra little by little, until the urine seeps through the hair.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	When it is necessary to remove a stone from the bladder and use a catheter, do not stop until the bladder is empty and then use the catheter within a short distance after the bladder is emptied for relief.
Capitol .lix.	This phrase does not appear to be in Latin, Italian,
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	The quality of the catheterization of the bladder is clamped and appears to be consistent with this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or post-herpetic rash occurs in the bladder, or when it is swollen and has a raw edge, and you want to distill water and medicines from it, then use a clamped catheter of the type called a clamp catheter, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	However, if the removal of the catheter is difficult, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that case there are three ways: two from one side, as many times as necessary.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, in the place where the catheter is located, and which presses, and the second quantity that oppresses that, also, when any cause is removed from that drawn tissue, it is attracted, and when it is expelled, it is attracted, and when it is expelled long, second that clamps it, in the wars of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When you want to prevent moisture in the vesica, insert the extremity of the clasp at the humor, and strike it with that force that is directed towards the parts below, so that the humor is struck in the cavity of the clasp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And insert the extremity of the clasp into the verguja according to what has been recommended in the ciringua; and strike that humor with it that you have struck, so that that humor penetrates the vesica the most, and the thigh comes to that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the cristery by which the vesica is cristerized, and that is it:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery of silver or lead, of which the tip may seem like a small pen, and let it be directed to the liament.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take the vesica by motion, and stop in that humor which you want to cristerize in the vesica, and place it between two with great force, and heat that humor over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	When you enter the tip of the crystals into the groin.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then stretch your hand over the urethra and apply it to the groin area, as that humidity has already penetrated the urethra.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a urethra, then take a piece of gauze and press on that circle; perforate it completely through its entire circumference; then enter your finger as far as it can go, so that you can add the circle as much as you want, and if you want to add more water, add more.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then tie that in the instrument and make it as you have made it in the urethra, and express it through your hand when the humidity reaches the urethra.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol, lx. (This is a Latin phrase that
De extraccio de peyra.	Excretion of urine.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	In the division we have already mentioned the species of urine and its cure in the medicines, and the difference between urine produced in the testicles and urine produced in the urethra, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	When I have spoken of the kidney in which I operate and cut, it is said that...
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the kidney generated in the true vesica is the one that is located within the vesica.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you tell this clear and concise description.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, say that the kidney generated in the true vesica truly affects the child; and from the halls of it is that the urine that is excreted from the vesica seems like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the uterus raises its chest, and moves its eyes, and approaches; and there is a foro for the anus in the middle of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is said that the treatment of children who have lived to be fourteen years old is difficult; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More in the young it is easier for gout to be between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which the kidney is larger and the cure is more difficult; and if it is fewer, it is opposed to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	When I arrive at the treatment of that, begin with the beginning of that which Christians describe as the crimson wound that extends the entire fence that is in the patient's intestines; then that fence has some vessels that prohibit the encroachment of the peel of the inquisition.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And be near the wound in the patient's feet and be careful and cautious so that the peel does not descend to the opening of the vagina, or jump from a place or some veins.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And make that piece between your hands and the patient's legs, and leave the patient's feet further away from the cushions, so that the vagina is completely made to fit into the parts later.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And make sure that and all of that is well done.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Then if you feel the peel in the space, then cut as much as possible on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not cut all of the end, then cover that with oil the tip indicated by the left hand, if the wound is small, or the other finger if it is completely full, and insert that in the patient's buttock.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	When the stone has passed through the urethra that was previously blocked.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	It gradually passes through the small by the vaginal opening.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on that side of the stone, and expel it through the openings of the bladder in the location where you previously made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the attendant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the fingers on the opposite side of the opening, and to hold the catheter that was previously removed from the vagina, in the location where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the sponge that is in this form of the catheter:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut it off at the point where it enters the thigh and the fingers, not in the middle, but rather at the left side of the cushion; and the incision should be on the stone that was previously inserted in the urethra, and it should be a transverse incision, so that the incision is wide and not too deep, according to the quantity of the stone that can be inserted into the urethra, and not too much, as you may understand from the stone that was previously inserted in the urethra, and it should be forgotten its deficiency.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You know that from the stone there is one kind that has an angle and edges, for the cutting of which it is difficult to do.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that hardness, it resembles a claw, it is round, and it makes the harder cutting.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is that kind with its angles and edges, adjust in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forcibly cut, you know how to hold onto that, or what forcefully holds onto the end of the same as the one you press on the stone with, and does not escape from it; or what inserts the subtle curved instrument further inside.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot hold onto that, increase the width of the groove a little, and if you see flow of blood, tighten on that with vitriol that has been cut.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is not of one kind, push the edge at the beginning to the mouth of the vesica and insert it over it; and push a little further in; and seemingly make if its waves are less than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is very large, ignorance is that you are inserted into that big piece of tissue, and one of two causes may have occurred: whether it lives or dies in the continuous distillation of urine, for which reason the location is not yet fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May the expulsion of the stone be made if it has been expelled outside, or if the engine is in the fracture of the uterus within which it has been extracted through the vagina.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	When you have completed your operation, fill the abdomen with gauze and bandages of aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or oil rose and water, over that drape to prevent the thread from becoming detached.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And raise the thigh on the chair seat, and do not slide the ligament across the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that has slid, wipe the place with water and oil, and apply it to the affected area daily, and when it is cured, apply it to the affected area every other day until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the plague there is an abscess with inflammation and swelling, and it appears as if the sac is frozen in the vesica, and from that it is the prohibited urine (and this is known by the discharge of the sac), then enter the aforementioned into the plague and extract that sac, for it causes the vesica to corrode and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you wash the plague with water, salt, and vinegar, and it is opposite to all species, and what is convenient for the cure when it is healthy, then...
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover in all the hours of the cure when you lie down your thighs and adjust the medicines that were placed over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the bladder is small and is in the meat of the thigh, and it sticks to it, and the prohibition of urine is applied, then you cure it as follows: you open that with an axe, and many have been accused of this for being split; and now I open it, and this is the form of it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	When the joint pain is caused by an extramural triangular growth, it becomes hard and remains in its place.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then hold it firmly, and tie it with a thread to prevent it from returning to the vagina.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the uterus, making it easy to remove that which has been inserted into the vagina.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then rotate the perforator in your hand and insert it little by little into the vagina, and you will perforate the hole that was made to allow the other part of the penis to penetrate; when most of the urine has been expelled.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand over the vagina where the penis was previously inserted, and when most of the urine has been expelled, that part becomes soft and is forgotten, and the wound heals.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this treatment is not suitable for you due to any reason that prohibits the use of this method, then tie a knot in the vagina and another one outside the vagina.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then close the opening in the uterus with two strips of cloth.
E aprop extratz aquela.	E aprop extratz aquela. (When it is necessary to extract that.)
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua. (When it is necessary to remove the cord and modify the sinus cavity, which is formed in the abscess.)
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	When there is no need for a stone to be removed from the bladder, it is only because it does not return to its cavity, and the other limb is also done, as when the stone is slid along the urethra, the catheter returns to its place and takes the urine.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And so it is necessary when you have removed the stone, that you raise the catheter to its parts, or that you return the appropriate amount, and collect the urine as they have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitulum LX.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Chapter 60. Of extracting stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are fewer in number.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see stones in any of those, it is difficult to cure them, and they are forbidden by powerful hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very strong.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is very clever and can disrobe when she is in childbirth, or is not of the female sex.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not know this art very well, especially the operation itself.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision on the heel in women is longer than the location of the heel, therefore it requires a deep incision, and in that case there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If you need to provoke it, you should hold a woman's leg scientifically and gently, and not too tightly.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are not privy to that, you should hold the woman's leg subtly and gently, or present a mature woman's leg in the position of the woman's legs, or a woman who is parting this art in the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make the presentation, and command the one who performs all that you command, from the investigation of the heel to the beginning; which causes him to look if the woman is visible, hold that you said in the buttocks of the man and want the heel.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If it is too tight, cut that off and hold it away from what you said, and command the one who performs to insert on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not visible, command the mature woman to enter what you said into the cavity of the miscarriage and investigate the heel, and hold her left hand on the vagina and appreciate that as good appreciation.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If that worsens, then cover that with something comfortable and gradually increase the heat to that of the orifice of the vagina in the parts where it is most sensitive, until it reaches the level of the anus.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then place it over the area of the hernia of the cone in the part where the anus is located and center the urethra on that part, and he will say that it is not painful in that area anymore.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	The incision is short at the beginning; and then place the sheet over that incision, and if you feel the urethra, adjust the size according to the amount that you know will cause the urethra to get wet from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You know that the parts of the urethra are mucus: four of those are small and thin, rough and harsh, long and round, and have no wrinkles.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many parts of the urethra there are for that reason, which you indicate over that which you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood, adjust in the place where the catheter was inserted and hold it for an hour until the catheter is detached, and then return to your operation when the urethra is dry.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	When you prepare the instruments that you will need for the removal of stones in men, so that you can help those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see blood, and you know that the expulsion of the stone is from the urethra that was inscribed, then place powder on the spot and stretch that am pulvils and strictura descent, and do not continue; and remove the stone and do not extract it further, for fear the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And treat the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the stone is removed, and the area becomes wet, then return to your operation as soon as the stone is outside the body.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of sectioning about hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not only an addition of moisture in the white gut which is left behind by the cord of the generative cells containing the blood, and is called a gut.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some are in the patient's own flesh which is prepared naturally at the time of the blood, when it is not another blood; and it is the cord of the generative cells between the white gut which has been said, and it is not until then that it is not tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia occurs due to the dilatation of the abdominal wall, which is caused by the infiltration of this material into the abdominal cavity, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow on the abdomen.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This humidity has various colors, where the color is either yellow and becomes citrine or bloody, red, black fecal matter, or clear watery substance, and it is called urine.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	When the sweat glands by which this addition of water is made are located: four if they are in the white cube that has been mentioned, then reduce the size of the hole a little longer than the figure of the nail, and appear the genital area, where the humidity counts that of the entire part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the proper panty, then reduce the size of the hole a little longer than the figure of the nail, and it is estimated that there is another nail.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the moisture is between the groin and the white cube, then reduce the size of the hole a little longer than the figure of the nail, and the sensation is felt.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	If you want to know the color of the moisture, then spread the color of the moisture in the hole as far as it can be reached through the cushion; and then according to that, judge what is inside the fabric of the cushion.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the care of the patient's arm, then cover that command at the thigh that is possible, and sometimes the cost of the pleasure.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	When the patient is lying on their back with one leg extended, and the other leg is supported, the doctor should pause the movement of the limb.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then settle on the left side of the patient and command the assistant to follow the right side, who extends their arm from the hip to the two lats up to the chest muscles and the pubic area of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then grip the fat with your hand and separate the chest muscles of the lower abdomen along the length of about three fingers.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	If the cut is made along the second line of the inguinal crease, it should be made close to the line of the groin, but not touching it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Then clean the area, and observe, and keep an eye on it so that you do not injure it; and your cleaning is good if you remove that part that is suspended from the lower abdomen and carefully examine the cleaning according to the amount you can possibly do.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then drill a large hole in the bladder wall and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And if you separate the two lips of the incision of the unciform, and extend the cicatrix to the parts below; and do not touch the coda of the genitals comprehended, and insert the cicatrix in that hand which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert that hand into her totality or into the thighs, and most importantly, the "latz subtil" which if you do not scrutinize perfectly the insertion of the hand, it is not guaranteed that the water will return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If you proceed with the removal of that deformed part of the spine at the time of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the rib, return that part, and appropriately adjust the edges of the spine of the genital area, and properly care for that wound as the others, if it is healthy.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the wound of the body is corrupted by another malady, make sure that you lie on those vessels which hold the suspensors, and extract the wound, and properly care for that as they have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in several parts examples, you know that those are the hernias; therefore, insert that part following what you have done in the other opening; and if it appears to you that it is an operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	When you have removed the sac, enter the submerged lanas in olive oil or rose oil; and then cover another lane that you have submerged in vinegar and olive oil, and expand it over two gussets and the mirac of the belly; and then unfold the folded parts and pulvis, and lay them on the part that follows this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	When the patient's thighs are open and cushioned with blankets, and their hands are held, their knees are stretched as far as possible; and their feet are placed at the ends where they are pressed by a knife or damp cloth, and their toes are inserted into the groove of the horse's hoof, and the other end is placed at the ankle, and two more are placed on two thighs further away, and two more on two stirrups, and all the stretching is adjusted in the groove of the horse's hooves.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cauterization instead of incision with a knife; and it is that you hold the subtle cauterizing iron and insert it into the pin that holds the gut, and it is ignited according to what has been recommended after discovering that the white bladder contains water, and you then hold the cauterizing iron in this way:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It seems to be written in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then you pierce that bladder, and it is ignited when all the moisture has been expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	1. Extend the thumb over the nail, and scrape it with the thumb, and gently burn the cauterization subtly; and inscribe the second one that you can possibly enter if you eradicate all of it; and keep away from the fire that does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You are aware that this operation is saved and has long-lasting effects on the flow of blood, and is better than a section operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you have an aversion to having a post-operative dressing applied at the time of incision or cauterization, or during the flow of blood, please be assured that I will apply the dressing as required for your comfort, according to the standard procedure.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the thigh is fearful and does not hope for the second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as recommended by me; and when you are certified that you understand, that hernia is painless.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Please ensure that you apply the dressing to the thigh over any elevated area, making a post-operative incision in the lower part of the swelling, and then pause the perforation according to the length of the incision.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if the wound is wide, I will cover it with the entire hernia.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand over the area and hold it there, to prevent the hernia from coming out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And care for that after the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If you have an aversion to the egret of the hernia at that time when you are perforating it: and this is not done except for the white gauze in the orifice of the plague causes opposition and prohibits the application of the dressing, please ensure that you place the pen or instrument in the plague from which the hernia is extracted, in the form that precedes; or adjust in the oppression of the plague a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	You know that the poison returns, and it takes about three or four months; and when it is added, you must perforate it according to that same nail, so that the patient can pass those days in peace.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol, lxiii.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	When it comes to cutting a hernia in the flesh and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	It is feared that there may be harm to the major structures during this hernia cut; however, I have seen its release and it was saved for the better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you remember the operation in that case and the specifics of the sutures.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that the sutures are made on the cheeks of those whose genes are combined and is caused by various causes: either acute superfluity of agriculture, which is deposited in the genes, or by puncture.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the suture is according to the color of the cheek, and it does not fade in the pain, and it is a heavy suture.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very hard the suture is made, of which the color is dark, and it does not resist in the pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some points are made by the nudation of the arteries, and by inflammation of those vessels that were previously remembered by the patient, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	When joint pain is caused by inflammation of the tendons, it is known as tendinitis when you compress that area with your fingers; and it does not matter if it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	When that which is caused by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed from any cause, it is necessary to apply compression with the cloths.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that under this seal there is a section and over the other parts; and if you insert the code of the genital, and extend the part to the divisions thereof, and extract that from the white cipher, and untangle the suspensors of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensors you extracted from the whole division of the divisions of the part, and tie those.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the erection is already solid in those consolidated flesh, it is necessary to extract and insert that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if adhesion comes from any cause of the cipher, or between that which is between the belts, it is necessary to extract and insert all of that adhesion and inscribe it in a round way.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the origin is of flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind, it is necessary to insert and inscribe all that is of him, and extract the erection as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When you have completed your operation, fill the hole with the wool that is yellowish and red, and then care for it as you would with another treatment if it becomes infected.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitulum lxxxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of a hernia that is strangulated.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A post has occurred due to being wrapped in an envelope-like structure resembling a blotch of mucous from the testicles, and it becomes difficult to perform movement and walking over the thigh.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this condition, there is fear for what precedes the rememoration.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is believed that an operation was performed on the second attempt after the first attempt.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that you make the thighs lie on an elevated pillow; and raise the suspensors of the testicles to their parts there; and tie the guts of the genitals to the thighs at the knots you see on the verge; and hold onto those other ministers that you, and extend them vehemently.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And if you proceed to cut through the joint with a sharp knife, it is customary to call this gout.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And if you remove all the parts that you have mentioned in the extraction of the arch, it is customary to call this gout.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And if you leave an awl in which there is a double hole, and place it at the first of the places where the wounds occur, and place another one at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And if you cut through those in the lower part of the body according to the length of the bone, and extract that which is added with the humid and corrupted parts.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And if you cure the plague by curing the other plagues in which you want to be born through the cause of the legs which do not give birth to two generations, and it is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If you have wounds in all the legs, it is necessary to know that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for this reason are cut off from the thighs, because they are not nourished by the incision of the thighs, and they are established, or that they are cut off for this reason which is not a youth for them.
Capitol .lxv.	The given text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	1. "Capitol .lxv." is not a complete sentence and does not provide enough context to translate accurately.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The given sentence is in the language of the medieval medical treatise and does not have a direct translation into English. However, it seems to describe the cause of the hernia as a section that extends from the abdominal wall to the ventrum, causing the intestines to protrude through the rupture in the abdominal walls.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	The given sentence is also in the language of the medieval medical treatise and does not have a direct translation into English. However, it seems to describe the cause of the rupture as either from the abdominal wall or from the intestines, and that these specific causes can be due to various motives such as percussion, sautz (a term used for a type of pressure), clamor (a term used for sudden pain), elevation of any heavy object, or semblantz (a term used for a false appearance).
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The given sentence is in the language of the medieval medical treatise and does not have a direct translation into English. However, it seems to describe the symptoms of the rupture as being that it happens gradually over a long period of time, not suddenly, and that it causes pain in the abdomen, which is then followed by vomiting.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the symptom of the gallbladder is felt, at first it causes intense pain suddenly; and there are different apparent places reported from the adjacent spine, and this is due to inflammation of the intestine, and the cause of this in the parts deformed by the gallbladder.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some parts are forgotten outside the intestine by the gallbladder, and this is called the inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some parts are made by ventilation, and some parts are found in the gallbladder fenced, and here they are held, and it causes great pain and discomfort in the thighs, and some parts cause pain to become worse and more intense when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these symptoms, there is fear that iron is not avoided, because it may cause an attack in that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the management of the operation of that is what commands the patient to return the intestine to its place in the cavity, if it follows the rules of returning, and places his hands over the seat between the thighs, and raises the legs of the patient.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And if you approach the abdomen that is approaching the abdomen of the testicles to its parts, and insert the abdomen of the testicles entirely through the long; and then keep it in two lips of the incision second that indicates to fill the incision as much as possible for those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If the incision is second to the quantity that you can possibly have that the waist will be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And if you remove those clips that are still in the abdomen of the testicles, enter that the white opaque part of each part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then enter the next one that is in the testicle, in which the white opaque part is inserted, the which is left in the abdomen of the waist, and then enter the second one, and free from the adhesion that is in the part behind the waist.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if you take away the abdomen of the testicles from its parts, and then extend the white opaque part on the left side, and lift the waist with the abdomen to the incision's part; and command the minister to extend it further and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind the filled solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When asked about the cause of the intestine being wrapped around the white bone, it is said that there is no such cause.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you suspect any cause, then examine that in the abdomen ahead.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And if you take a needle of the size that has a thick pain in x number of times, and enter it into the abdomen through that, and go through the bone of the hip, which is below the coecum of the testicles, which is divided; and then insert the ends that come out of it, which are four, and place them on a figure over any part in the crotch; and it is said that the hip of which they have told you has the coecum of the testicles below it with great strength in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And if you involve the ends of the pain and hold them in such a way that the parts of the vessels that do not push the tractometer for any cause, do not come to a point of apostema cauterization, then...
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And pause another limpet for the second limpet, after three days; and these two limpets are placed on the hip that has the coecum of the testicles below it, according to the size of the first one, and inscribe the remaining part in the second round, and take it away from the body.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And you should insert into the part of the navel that is left after cutting the section of which they say runs through sin and anus, as they have recommended in this book.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And apply wool submerged in oil and rest on the plagua; and apply the ligament that they have recommended (and some white ciphac is cauterized, which they say about the incision of the thighs of the flux of sanc, where four veins are found) and let the ligament enter if it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the pain of the thigh is delayed, you should put a bowl of warm water on it and rest over that which falls according to what they have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And cure the plagua with the other cure of the plaguas that is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of a ventouse hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia it is not seen what has been done with the patient under the care of the physician.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing that is said is that it is done as they have recommended in the hernia that they are; the which is that you listen to the ways on the section over the difficulty of the patient; and you dry in the middle of the area in the environs of the apostema that I have ordered, if the vayssels fall, inside that the vayssels.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	When the plague has been cured according to what they have said, enter and see if it is cured.
Capitol .lxvii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language similar to
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	The first line of the text you provided, "De la disrepción que es fayta en les anguonars," translates to "Of the disrespect that is
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some wounds in the thighs have burst, and they say that the location is like this, and I have seen it.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	When one does not give any cause to the intestines of the patient; and if one does, it is very little; and then return to normal within all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged, a slit is made in the intestine that was inserted into the abdomen; and this happens due to the extension of the intestine which, as they have said, causes the intestine to be extended, and it becomes soft and the place from which it came emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of the patient is by cauterization as was previously reported in the narrative of the patient.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some wounds are cured by iron according to this method: and that is, the thigh of the patient is placed over the right knee between your hands, and the area of the emergence of the apostemata is cleaned by section according to the degree of three degrees.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white intestine that is inside the abdomen where it was discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And take the rope and place it on the emergence of the intestine, and press that on the fundus of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	When the prominent points of the shoulder are located over the extremity of the radial bone of the thumb, and one adjusts the suture to either of them.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	When the end of the bone is extracted from the thumb, and not the entire radius, nor does it extend the hole, nor any other cause as you will know in the treatment of inguinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And when it comes to the cure of diseases, and when you insert the wounds, purify that and restore the hernia within what is solidified; for the thumb contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, where it is pressed for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the scrotum.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In many men, the scrotum is seen to soften when the testicles are observed, and the attention of the eye is directed to that.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary to do this to the one who is operated on in the treatment of the disease that causes pain in the thigh according to the way of the patient, and to make all the scrotum mollify over the natural scrotum; and then to adjust the lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, in the beginning, the excess of the softened codon is divided into three or four parts and then stitched firmly.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And insert between the stitches; and take care for the cure of other diseases that are inside when it is healthy and the wounds heal.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, and it is for this reason that I remind you of it in this free book; and it is not necessary to remember it except by a few hands, one of which is the one that knows that here it is in the science of the surgeon when he is about to be buried from that, which knows the cure of the animal to which it belongs; and the other hand is that we want castration of other animals for our purposes, such as for motors, and mouths, and pigs, and like animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting or by making a slit in the flesh.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When a wound is caused by a stab, the way to operate is that we make the animal enter inside those parts of the body which are softened and lined with fat and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And hold those parts in your hand inside where they are loosened and do not appear further the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When a wound is caused by cutting and slicing, know that you hold the animal and press the codon of the testicles of the other side with your hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And tie the suspensors, and place over each foot one cut made by two feet process.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And place those points that will have to excoriate.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not lie over those of the clitoris any cause, only the clitoris subtle which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this castration is better than the one caused by stabbing, for when a deep cut is made, the animal wants to come out because of the testicles.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague inside where it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	1. Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	 Hermafrodozia in men is the second type: one appears when the space in the testicle sac is lacking, and in this case, a female penis figure appears in the sac.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When some of those urinary tracts are found in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special organ: and it is that which is located on the female's petticoat as two testicles are in a man's entire body, but in a part of it as the pubic hair of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure is of three kinds: of two men and one kind of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is said that you have made those girdles tight around that part to relieve the pain of that, and that the cure for those pains of other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, where the urine comes from the area of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of the pain and swelling caused by women's causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Great pain is worn around natural causes when they are erect and the gaze is legible; and some are magnified in some women to such an extent that they spread as in men and through the act of intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	And it is said that you have too much pain at your own or another's genitals and are tightening.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	When not closing the wound, primarily at the tip of the nose, because it does not allow for the flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And this cure is that of those diseases that are healed when they are cured.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The flesh that is most painful is the flesh that is in the horrific part of the body, and it is often affected by the parts that are adjacent to it, and for this reason it is called "herniary" (and for this reason the first callers called it "herniary"); therefore, we should wound it as we would a slow wound, and cure that part when it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is that which causes pain in the female genitalia, and it is not perforated, or if it is, it is very small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And is it natural or accidental?
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is because of the disease that preceded it, and it is made by unsuitable flesh or by a small subtle or esoteric cipher.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made on the tip of the nose, or in the cheeks, or in the corners of the mouth, or in the chin, and it is forbidden to cry and to swear, and most of all, it is forbidden to menstruate, and very much so, it is forbidden to menstruate.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	When the knowledge of that is sought by looking at the pulse, if the pregnancy is apparent, proceed; otherwise, close to that as much as possible with your hand or with your elbow.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the pregnancy is not apparent, and it is probable that the woman's lips are swollen, then you should cut and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And if you place your hand over the woman's swollen lips and pause the ties as much as possible, it will help to reduce the pain.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And if the woman is lying on her side, with her thighs extended, and you extend her lips as much as possible to that subtle cipher which is broken and pregnancy is Uterine, it will help to reduce the pain.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And if you pull the hair and grease it with oil and place that over that place, and hold it there for the day that that place is not yet solidified.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the cipher is large and rough, then you should cover that with something like salt or mercury.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the pregnancy is for flesh, then you should suspend that and insert it there.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	When you have given the patient the medicine that stops the flow of his blood, it is customary to apply warm ointments, such as lard and mustard, and compresses, adjusting the albuminous solution according to the case.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And apply a wide-mouthed bucket for the purpose that the plague may not be solidified too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it with your hand for the time of the operation and apply wet cloths to the affected area.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And when she is cured, she should be returned to the other healing of solidification before she is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some people have accidents in the more distant countries of other animals, and it is necessary to follow this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is for carpal tunnel syndrome, the carpal tunnel that is most affected should not be cut in the same way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capital. Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of the red bandage that happens to the women in the confinement.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated of the openings of the veins that are within and not those that are continuously corrupted; and they are ancient and are considered hemorrhoids.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already said in the division the specifics of those and the symptoms of those, and I direct those that receive treatment to those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hemorrhages and wounds occur when they are in the prime of life and do not appear at the time of feeling, and those who are not treated with iron are not cured.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Many of those who are in the surgery of the prime of life over those on whom the feeling appears, are those that have been cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover that you place the woman in much cold and extend her arms at the elbows or at the shoulders, or at the wrists, and insert those into the nails.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And you cover those with dust from the wound of one of the inscissive powders with their bites, saying that it is like that and seems to be like that.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And you push the feet for an hour, and then pause in fresh water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the wound persists, then do that dressing in decoction of sumat, of scorers of milgranas, and of waters and of resemblances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And make dough of fine and comfortable ingredients such as honey and add water and make a plaster of this with the dust of that on the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sac is separated, it is; and if not, make it stick with two ventouses, and to the nipples its scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take wool and submerge it in the sugar of colander or the sugar of armagnac or the sugar of garlic, and apply it to the wound; and after that, care for the wound so that it comes out when it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Many people ask what the sharp regard is, covered that you are informed that this is from the second sentence I said in this translation.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that within when it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of the umbilicus that happens in the most.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special motes of apothecary drugs accident in the most, as crane and apothecary lapident and ulcer and adhubel and erpet and erpetromen and emorroy and raguar and thyl and other apostemas.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	I have already mentioned these diseases and their symptoms, as well as the remedies for each of them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	When you ask about the treatment of this wound in the book of apostelmy, it is the one that is most dangerous among the apostelmy you have chosen, and if you want to know in what way the operation of this iron is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	However, if you consider that the pain of the wound in the beginning is acute and caused by percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it enlarges and if you touch it you feel the sentiment, then no cure can be made without perforation of the wound, and you must cure it as soon as the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And you consider that you make the woman lie on a pillow that has pillows; and lean on the side and adjust the sides to the part where the wound is located further down the abdomen, and the thighs are expanded, and pause the thighs' belts further from the thigh bones, and you tie it with what is convenient for you.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife follows the right way and administers the instrument that is used for the orifice of the larger part, in the form that will be found in those causes that you will make.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to insert this instrument into the female's vagina, and ensure that the instrument does not cause more pain than the previous one, it is necessary to first lubricate the vagina with a suitable lubricant.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the previous one, you must cover the prepuce of the vagina with powder to prevent the insertion of any other instrument into the vagina.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And ensure that you cover the edge of the instrument that comes out of the lac and that the inserter holds the instrument and rotates it until the orifice of the vagina is clean.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched to the face, the eyes, and the lips, you must cover the tip of the instrument with the sputum of the patient.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sani is evacuated, you must cover the plague with a submerged machine in rose oil or green oil containing any sterilizing agent; and stop the calcium in the section of the vagina.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	When you have paused the larger part and placed your hand over the submerged, wet fabric that is made of mud and contains small stones, it is necessary to continue with the following steps.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And after a few days, if the remedy that corresponds to this condition is found, you should enter it as soon as it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	If some vegetables are washed more and dried with water that is mixed with honey and a little milk, and if the water in which they are soaked contains herbs or long-lasting aromatic plants, it will be returned to the pot.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the water is not completely drained from the more washed vegetables, you should know that it is forbidden to use the ferrite for the cure of that person, as they have already been treated with the remedy that has been found in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Teach the mothers how to prepare the best drinks for their children when they reach the second natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the mother should know the beginning of the natural figure of the child at the beginning, and it is because when you see the woman express herself in the parts she desires to smell the air, and over that there is a leak due to the part being over there, and quickly the enbrio is given, you should know that this part is the second natural figure, and the essence of it is on the navel cap, and the second one is either suspended or hanging from the umbilic.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	When a part of the body is not natural or usable, such as when the fetus is positioned over one's heels and the foot is positioned in front of the head, or on the shoulder, or on the head itself, or on the stomach, and it is converted over the collarbone, it resembles the figures of the unnatural ones.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to avoid error and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you are showing all the figures of those, and which engine is in those to be significant for this and to be over this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the point is placed on the natural side of the head, and that is very hard for the man to bear, and sometimes the virtue of it is weakened, then do as follows: either the woman holds it, or she ties it with a cord, and evaporates the condensation of the man's sweat and his own humors.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And insert the menstrual cloth between the small and tight parts, or do it on the second day when it comes out that is in her of wetness.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	When the woman presses her belly in order to deliver the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If she does not press, it is believed that the woman's womb is covered with milk glands of pitcher and milk glands of fenugreek in her chest.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And he commands her, the midwife, to open the womb and pull out that child as quickly as possible; and she will put her hand in her mouth and take out the child every hour, until the fetus is completely delivered.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the child is delayed in coming out, it is believed that you can reduce the difficulty little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If she does not obey the command, it is believed that you should put the woman on a bed and lift her feet up, and cover the bed with a cloth; and the woman should be held so as not to fall from the convulsion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the child is not born alive and dies, it is believed that you should insert your hand and extract the placenta from the womb or from the body of the mother and extract that part equally, so that that part is completely removed.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	When the embryo is swelling in the feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When you press on the swollen feet, it is necessary to push those inside, and then convert the small foot, and then pull out that part, and then take a piece of the intestine and stretch those small parts one by one.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	How much the embryo swells in the thighs, then you command it to express itself, and make it withdraw slowly, and if necessary, open a wound so that it does not forget if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if you do not forget that they have advised, then return the small parts one by one to the place where you paused the second natural figure, and that part will make you forget the swelling.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited to do all that they have advised, then take some glue from the apothecary and dissolved gum, and press them all into the mortar with good percussion, and apply lines of this to the female part, and let the pus come out of the belly of the man.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cezar in waterproofing wax, when you get the hypocenters.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When sometimes the parts left by the patient are softened, then you should put milt under his sub-ventilation and pause at that point.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When the sub-fumigation lasts for an hour, you should place a cloth over a cupped hand, and apply it with that, closing the mouth and nose of the patient, and removing it, and pressing the lower part of the abdomen of the patient with light pressure, so that the fumes do not escape.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Inspection of the foot on the affected side and its surrounding areas.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the foot is inspected in this manner, you should gently press on the smallest parts of your body; and the woman's thighs should be raised on the bed, and her feet should be lowered, and those should be placed over the pillow, and the rest of your body should be covered.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press lightly on the abdomen of the patient, and remove what is left of the foot from the ankle that has been prepared at the lower part of the abdomen.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot is not forgotten, you should hold the foot and move it gently, and press on that as it passes over the hip bones, so that the foot can reach the parts below.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And insert your hands into the patient's thighs and gradually swallow the small parts one by one, and command the woman to express herself when the part is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The translation of "Eyssiment del fet latutidally pending une de les suas mas" is not directly translatable as it seems to be a medical term or phrase in a language similar to Latin
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	The translation of "Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar" is:
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If you cannot proceed, make the girdle on the belly, and press the thighs of the patient in the violent concussion, and apply remedies which you have recommended from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the child is born, make that incision on the abdomen, and study about the reduction of the uterus, and cut off the second natural figure, and order the woman to understand that she will come out when she is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Comment on the fetus about its expansion of its legs and the abdomen of the patient is at two o'clock.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Cover that the midwife holds the uterus of the fetus and turns that small part by part, and it will be easy.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when you have cut off the second part and while you are doing it, and apply remedies which you have recommended from oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And when you command the woman to push small parts at a time and when she has given birth, make that incision on one side and command her to lean over the left side, and command her to be compressed; and make that stornudar as soon as possible.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	This Latin phrase translates to "The exit of the fetus is prepared on the side." In medical terms, it could be
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you are about to perform the second part of this procedure, consider, and then insert your thumb into the opening as soon as it is evacuated from the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the foot is hung over the face and neck, then you should insert your finger into that part of the belly, so that it does not stick and stay.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	When you have pushed the foot into the parts of the toes that are inside the second part that covers it, and order the woman to look at her feet, and if she feels any pain, let her know that it is due to the swelling, whether by God or by chance.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of many newborn children.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that some wombs are born with certain motions, and some have three or four, which is strange and hard to understand; but this is not the cause of nature, and it does not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiplied, one second, and are separated by cicatrices, distinguishing which part of the umbilical cord each one has, and if some women have veins for swelling as natural as a fetus, and some have veins for swelling that are not as natural, then report it.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to count, the child's development and to find out what has been reported about the unnatural figures, then you take care of those as follows.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife skillfully and gently touches this that gives ease and subtlety, and delays, and is inventive according to the entire figure according to what the physician prepares for the cure of the patient's health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that it is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the first, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and eight, and nine, and ten, and it is necessary for you to verify that one woman aborts at six, and another at all formed, which causes a fetus to be born due to a measurement of the glorious savior's saws.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And thus it is also known that the midwife knows as much about this as she thinks she does, and therefore follows what she believes.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitulum 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you extract the dead fetus, it is said in the division of medicine and does not cause harm, and you should have used an operation, and you know that if the woman is of good virtue and not of those accidents by which she suffers loss, then consider.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying on her back with her head inclined and her thighs raised, it is said that she is in labor.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The midwife should hold those parts or the woman's thighs in the bed so that the child does not stretch too much and cause the birth to be difficult.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then wet the mouth of the larger child with olive oil, honey, gum, and semen of the father.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And apply the midwife to her own body with those oils and gums, and enter the woman's body into the larger child, and approach the place where the hairs of the fetus will be.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate places are as follows: then consider if the child is ready to be placed on the woman's chest, and you should keep the hairs in the nostrils, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or on the beard, or in the shoulder blades, or in the subclavian grooves.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the delivery is on the feet of the woman, you should in the pelvis, or in the back of the costals.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	If you hold the patient's arm, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the two ends of the left side, and insert the arm easily and keep the elbow in those places which have been marked, and enter if necessary to find the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And if you pause and keep your elbow in the appropriate position, or the third one if necessary, so that it is not too wide and does not extend beyond its right angle, just as much.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And be careful with the entire procedure, so that the incision of the patient is made as smoothly as possible, just as it is in tooth extraction for the elimination of the disease.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if you pay attention to the part where the extension is smoothed; and if any part of the patient is held, you should pay attention to the matron's hands that have been marked with oil and enter those places expertly and rotate around those parts that are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the part of the foot is forgotten, the hands should be moved to enter the place where it was placed; and make sure that all the foot is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the leg is distended under the other, and it cannot be reduced by compression, then cover that area with a cloth; and take out that part from where it is completely outside, and insert it either in the joint of the leg or in the thigh.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And cover those points on the other leg and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the foot is large, or it causes discomfort in the compression, or the mouth of the water is adjusted at the top, then cover those points between the sharp spines and cut the head and draw out the water, or use an instrument called "alundat", which has the shape of the other instruments in the capital that is appropriate for this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And it seems that the foot is large by nature: and cover that point with an alkaline substance, or take that point with an undiluted alundat as they have said; and take out those bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is distended and it causes discomfort, then be sure to cut inside that humidity which is in the chest and has been dried.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and the swelling is not large, you can insert your finger as far as it is possible for you to reach.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the abdomen is inflamed or in the hydration that is inside, you must cover the hole that is in it with your finger.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the pain is on the outer thigh, you should take the direction of the muscle towards the mouth of the knee and make it smaller.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen is tight, you must cover that hole with your finger and take out that which has been wrapped around the tummy and let the water that runs in it come out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are not moved, you should insert your finger into the left nostril; if the mouth of the knee is swollen, you should introduce your finger into the preputium of the penis, and make the hole smaller, and then insert one or two fingers into it, and pull them out towards the mouth of the knee.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the mother is stitched up with a thread due to epilepsy, which occurs in the child, then do not cover the stitches with anything; instead, cover the stitches with a moisturizing cream.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the plaster is on the side of the face, then as much as possible, apply it with a needle: and administer the medicine that has been given in the plaster.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If this is not possible, then apply it on scabs, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not cover any cause of the second day.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your operation, apply the medicine that has been given in the stitches, which cause epilepsy in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If fever occurs, then use warm compresses and apply the other medicine.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	You have already seen a woman in the belly of whom there was a plaster, and over another marked point, and another dead plaster was made for her.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to some people at some point in their life to have a sudden pain in the eye; and it starts to swell when touched, and begins to scratch the eyelid.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called to treat it, and it was treated for a long time, but the wound was not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you examined it for some causes and applied strong attracting plasters, and examined the bone, and passed to another bone, and examined another one; and you were too surprised to find that there was no bone in the stomach.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought they were from the bones of the dead body.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you ate the wound, and extracted the female bones from the eye sockets, the ones that were present in the many disposed holes, and had been there for a long time, corrected by a small piece of cloth.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you did not believe it to be strange, but rather knew that this is known and helps those who use the artificial hand to manage their work better.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary to extract the bone.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	This line seems to be describing the shape of a vagina that is being opened for examination. Here's a possible translation: "The form of the vag
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This line appears to be describing a type of sternutation or sneezing that occurs when the free (or loose) ends of two tendons are engaged, causing two points of pain in the extremities of two fingers. Here's a possible translation: "This is the form of sneezing in which the free ends of two tendons are engaged, causing two points of pain in the extremities of two fingers.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	This line seems to be discussing the possibility that this virtue (or effect) may be caused by tightness or congestion in the blood vessels, and may be relieved by applying a warm poultice made of herbs, such as mugwort or henbane. Here's a possible translation: "This effect may be caused by tightness or congestion in the blood
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	This line appears to be describing the length and width of a fist, as well as the length and width of the palm and thumb. It also mentions that the length of the fist is equal to the length of a palm and a little finger, and the width is equal to two digits or a little finger. Here's a possible translation: "The length and width of a fist are described, as well as the length and width of the palm and thumb. The length of the fist is equal to the length of a palm and a little finger, and the width is equal to two digits or a little finger.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	This is the translation of the first line:
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera: "This appears to be another type of pus, which is more fluid.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	When a swelling is caused by hard or soft nails, it is called a corn by doctors.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, in the ends of those two additments, and the length of them is like that of a hand, and the width of the other is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And if you want to open it wider, then do this by placing the female on the bed with her feet hanging down, opening it according to the space between your thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open the hole according to the size of the instrument you have, as the forceps engulf the mouth of the wound according to the amount you want of the metron.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of how they described the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of pushing with the one that is pushed by the other:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of comparing with the one that is compared to the greatest head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps that have teeth at the end, sometimes, and some are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes, at the end of which teeth are like those of a saw that is inserted and counted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The first line of the text is not in English, but rather in a language that is somewhat similar
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Forma de unci" translates to "shape of a woman" and "havent una spina" translates
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci havent doas spinas" translates to "shape of a woman with two spines." This
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit" translates to "shape of forceps that have teeth that can close around the head of the foot." This suggests that the forceps are being
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit" translates to "shape of a stump with two ends at which the head is cut off." This could refer to a
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Forma de dos espatums latz" translates to "shape of two stumps la
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Totz aquels instruments so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat" translates to "All of these instruments have been practiced, and when you have multiplied the ingredients of that and prepared them by the artisan, you must use it in its operation and use it for the men according to their quantity." This suggests that the text is providing instructions for using a set of instruments to perform a
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla" translates to "And if the work of those instruments is not what you expect, then the necessity of those cannot be excused." This suggests that the user should not blame the instruments for
De extraccio de la segondina.	When extracting the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is held by the mother, you must command the midwife to hold the umbilical cord, and gently pull it away from the wound, and firmly hold your hand over the baby's mouth and nose, and if necessary, squeeze tightly.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And then, you should take a knife and cut through the covering and pause in that area where the baby's mouth is, like this, with a sharp edge and an anvil and a hammer, and scissors, arabic cinnamon, and sweet ginger, and St. John's wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the knife, and pause it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then, place a cannava tube in the baby's mouth and hold it until the vapor comes to the concave of the mother's face.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And gently pull it away as has been said, and the second child will be delivered quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If the midwife does not deliver the second child quickly, you should command the mother to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of aloe and water, and insert it into the cervix and wants to find the second child, and when it is found, pull it out gently piece by piece, and if the mother clenches her fist, you should extract the child's head little by little so that the mother does not push too hard.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	When a joint is painful and cannot move easily, it is called arthritis by doctors.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the amount of attraction, so that it obeys and escapes from attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mouth of the woman is cut, we have already recommended the cure of strangulation and the medical treatment of the womb.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If no all causes are kept in mind, it is important to note that this lies in the cavity of the woman's thigh, and is covered by the femoral artery; fourth, this will become inflamed and dissolved after a few days and will be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it becomes inflamed, it is located in the elevated maw of the head and stomach, and that leads to the disease; and then it is important to administer sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	More often, the ancients used sub-fumigations of nitre and figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated, the retention of menstruation and the second day must be taken into account.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It may be seen or heard.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	When the tip of the toe is placed at the end of the heel and the sub-inhalation is placed over the fireplace, the smoke should be placed over the fireplace's bricks.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	Hold onto that entrance while the sub-inhalation is consumed and then proceed with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the cure of a non-perforated child's buttocks.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born with their buttocks not perforated, which are already small and fine.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then tell the midwife that she should perforate that one according to what is said in that small and fine one; and if not, perforate it with a sharp stone, and make sure that you do not touch the lizard.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place your hand over that fine fur in the vine and oil; and cure that one by making it enter when it is dry.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it may be fine, place your hand on the needle for a few days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if the fine skin of the buttocks has been consolidated for the consolidation of plague or aphthous ulcer, then tell that consolidation is firmly fixed, and cure it with what has been said in the cure and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	When treating fistulas that exit from the body,
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that exit from the body are low in nourishment and large, those that exit from the anus or from the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	When it is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When that node is old and comes from the wet and white or subtle mucous, and some are seen in these fistulas, some penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	When those penetrate are called by water that is passed through those for the exit and by ventilation; and some use the exit of the vents, and more easily it passes through those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	When some of those fistulas are seen to enter the space penetrating into the cavity, and entering the meat of the thigh; and when some of those penetrate into the joint of the thigh and enter the notch of the heel.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	When this is the case with the penetrating fistula and the non-penetrating one, it is because you place the end of the thread in the thigh, and enter it subtly to see whether iron or not there is in the fistula when it is not turgid.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If in that case the thigh is turgid, then you enter it subtly to feel whether it is full or the hair of the horse in the end of the thread that you send.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel any pain in the whole body or if you have not proceeded with any cause of evacuation, know that it is not penetrating, and you will be cured.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the meat of the urethra, its meaning is to excrete urine from that place and to prohibit it if that location in medicine is not solidified.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and the encumbrance of pain in the circuit, you should know that it may pass through here if there is no turtuositat in the bone, and the encumbrance of pain in the circuit of the part; and that it may cause damage at any time; and that it does not belong to that medication, nor is it solidified.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those that are penetrating, there is no cure for the whole body, and the cure of those is labor and effort of the male doctors over which it is fastened.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	When there is pain in a part that is not pierced and not old, it is recommended to use a doctor's needle the next time you recommend it, and that you have already used it.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	It is necessary to open the thighs of the patient over the patient's back and lift the limbs, as the buttocks are inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and if the attempt is not successful, it may be due to the fistula turcuity, so know the location where the attempt is being made.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that section of the thigh is near the anus, you should cover the intestine with the cloth as described in the section.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel that the intestine is already penetrated or discovered by the attempt, and you also feel in the buttocks or fat, you will certainly know that it is being penetrated; and then do not work in that, as it is not in the cure, so do as they have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, I may suggest to those who are healthy and young to eat apples.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the medicine that is believed to help youth, you should ignite the cauterization under the fistula according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert the ignited cauterization into the fistula around the anus; and repeat this several times until you know that all those adjusted fistulae that seem like a quill of a feather are completely ignited.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	When treating that swollen joint within the body, it is necessary to apply a remedy that can reduce all of those inflammations, and to also cure the damaged tissue and consolidate it, and if it heals, then it is good; but if not, it will not heal in another time with another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the needle goes in and does not penetrate into that which is inside the mentioned one, and between that and the needle that is made of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula at the end of the intestine, you should dry the skin around the fistula opening, and then the needle will be in the fistula when the dryness reaches the location where the extremity of the intestine is, and the intestine will be liberated and catched.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And wash those fistulated tissues that are assembled with a catheter of penicillin gum and do not cause any disease to them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If the flow of salve comes several times when it approaches you and your operation in those tissues, then you should milk that which is there and from the pus use an instrument to cauterize it with fire or with acute medicine, and if the cauterization is well done, it will cause adhesion of those tissues, and it will be an abscess of the excessive moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And if you want to care for those swollen parts on the border or within that location, and then you will have to take care of the pain caused by hard, dry flesh that hardens and solidifies.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in the medicines where there is sterilization and exclusion, when you have restored it, it is already cured and you do not fear re-treatment.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already entered into the bottom of the buttocks and is extended from the surface of the skin, then you enter the liquid that is in that place and investigate whether it is suitable for that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you want to attempt it and enter the fistula with your finger or with flesh, and it goes further in, then do not operate on it but follow this path of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize that flesh as has been said; or secure that entrance which you can achieve for the convation of that part and so that the medicine can enter easily into those parts and cure them quickly; and do not process it because it may cause the lass to be cut that is not inserted in the sheath, and may accidently cut over the wound of the egress of the will; and care for that as has been said that the flesh may become dry; or elongate that membrane and squeeze out the pus that seeps from that entrance, as has been said, or attempt or use another sharp-pointed instrument, and squeeze out those fistulae that are in the cutting and can be percrustacio; and strive to make the restoration of all the plague for the cut, and if the pus does not become solid, and runs from the entrance, and rinse the fistula at the end of the buttocks, and let it run for the wound.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	When the fistula is approached according to this method: when you insert the catheter into the fistula, and around the lower part of the thigh, near the surface of the skin and in the margin of the thigh, you will find that the catheter has perforated the end, which is like a needle point according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	When you enter the fold of that vein or around it, and then insert the probe as far as possible into the fistula to achieve its concavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If you penetrate the margin of the buttock as far as possible, then extract the vein from that point where you inserted the tube; and extract the ends of the vein and adjust the two ends, and sew them, and leave it for a day or two, and when you insert the vein into the flesh, sew it at the points where those flesh are entered that are between the ends of the vein and which cause pain.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then care for the plague when it is solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then do so with any tool you are prepared with, except for the penis, as it is not your responsibility to do this in order to prevent scarring of the lizard; and then do so when it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of spitting spines that is used to close the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not penetrate as much as it is necessary, so many times.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	When closing stitches in which the sinus runs through the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	When you have those small and large pains, and they are of different kinds, and motions, and the thighs, and at the extremities of the body, then...
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that follow the anus are usually of a dry nature, of the kinds that cause aguish or a small amount of pus, and are followed by the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is causing the fistula is that you command at the anus, that it be washed and that it express what comes out of it, as soon as it is loose and the tissues appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then, close it and suspend the strings or what you have on your waist, and apply those to the desired parts of your body.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	However, if the strings do not hold tight due to humidity or softness of the strings, then apply them to dry parts of the body, such as the chest, thighs, or belly, and extract them at the desired places, and place them back on after sprinkling some powder on them, so that they are in place of cauterization; or cauterize them after the caput of cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	When the other patient is healed, properly care for those.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the anus does not obey egression, cut it with a knife in the part where there is a small biting wound, and wash it with water that exits the anus more easily when it is relaxed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are causing pain in the anus, the cause of those is slight, and it is because you grasp those with your own hands or with a glove, or with those with a glove, and properly care for those that have said to you after they are cured.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have inserted sutures, cover them with this hand: hold the needle firmly and enter it into the hole and extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above, and make it penetrate into the hole of the other part, and envelop the extramitters of the needle in the part behind the hole, and stretch them latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with the strong structure and not touch the needle and extract the hole.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When gout occurs in all joints, and not just the feet, it is because the excess of the sinews of the body runs to that place.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place your hand on the buttock, covered with rose oil or almond oil; and place the other on the thigh and command the patient to stop.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then close that entrance with that box; and when it is closed, treat those wounds or other curacious entries as soon as they are cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of curing fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Watery discharges occur due to the lack of stitching or because of the constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if those are old and not useful in that medicine, you should know that those are applied to the point of sprue or to the end of the umbilicus when they are wet and hostile to those that have been sewn up, which prohibits their consolidation; and then treat them after they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	You should keep those that are wet and firm because the first part is not sanctified and is excoriated; and then treat them after they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of curing the abscess, this is closed.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You should know that the amalgamation of cold and heat causes inflammation, and it is not uncommon to see redness following the color of the chest like a clavicle, and it is found throughout the body and particularly in the areas of the feet and the testicles, and for this pain you must take care.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then know that if this is closed in the circuit of the lock, and it is held by the screws or by one, and it is eliminated from its place; and take care of this.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, make a point on the following that precedes in the capital seat.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Many of the warts are small, rough, round-shaped openings on the surface of the skin, and many children's veins have been seen to flow through them.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment of the wart is that it expands and becomes embedded in that, or that it presses on that with something firm or with the inside that encloses it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, make a point as they have said, either with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already some warts and not-warts have been eliminated with the instrument that you describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	When a small or large, narrow or wide opening appears on the surface of the skin, and when it becomes inflamed in that spot as if bitten by an ant, then make points around the area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment of the wound is to take a needle of bone or of wood, and make it strong, and place it over the ant within which it contains the circle of the canula of the parts of the wound; and then rotate your hand over it as it is in the circuit of the ant, and place it on the flesh of the limb, and expel the ant from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you want, make a needle of ram or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part of the canula that is traced should be done with subtlety, smoothly (not pierced), wrapped around so that over it the learning of the wound is polished and the rotation of that is made.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you want to burn the ant according to what is said in the cauterization of a nail on the head of the cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of the instruments that are used to administer the anointing of Christians.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some of the anointings are made with silver or gold, or they have been melted or molded; and some of them are made from the small instruments that are used, according to those which are administered, whether it is for the administration in the care of small children or for the buttocks which are freckled or scarred; and the anointings of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few anointings:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula of which it is linked to the bag is wide according to this method; and in this distinction, the bag is located at times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the penis is inserted into the anus, which is narrow (not cut) by the leon, and then becomes subtle; and in one of the groins there are two holes, and in the other side one hole, and the width of the hole is according to the size of the rays and a small penis.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	When the bag in which the medicines for the bladder of a beast or the wool of a lamb are placed is open, the razor should be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And if it is perforated by the tooth that rotates, and the largest part of the said space is between the teeth;
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And if it enters firmly into those teeth, of which the largest part is between the teeth; and if you surround them with a bag; and when it is placed in that bag, make sure that the bag is tightly closed at the top of the cristal between two distinct points, and close each tooth with a bag: The quality of the cristalization of each tooth is what you fill the bag with, which is stretched according to the tolerance of the thigh; and keep in mind that it should not be too long or too narrow.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the thigh should be placed on the side of the bed, and raise your changes on you and close it over the one that already has the men or a lancet; and take out the cauterization of olive oil or album of honey or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and insert it into the buttock with ease, and the nurse takes the bag and expresses it more and as soon as it is evacuated in the bowels of all that is in the cyst, and extra the cyst and the thigh take your changes at the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine forces it to subside, hold it as much as possible; and if you sleep on it for a whole night, it will improve in time.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you criminalize that in the cures for stomach ailments and the subsidence of the joints, then you will have to repeat the cauterization whenever it is necessary to heal.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttocks there are hemorrhages or protrusions, then you should be the one to be most subtle and leonine of the doctors, as those are the criteria that the children will follow.
De curacio de las plaguas.	In the cure of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And you have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues that it is appropriate for the free, and you say so that the cure of those is as good as the medicine according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, say that the plagues are diverse according to what they are pains and according to the place where they appear on the body.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which you open are the most common pains, such as gout, or inflammation of the spleen or of the chest, or percussion, or thrusting, or cutting, or seizures, or like those of the opening causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	When plagues occur in the parts of the body that are similar to those on the head, neck, chest, stomach, and limbs, they are called similar plagues.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	I advise you on the cure of some plagues based on your reasoning and rule over other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	I will begin with the simple head plagues, where the reminder of the compounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When you have a simple head plague that is not broken, consider whether it is due to urine or similarity, and if the throat has already been stretched and there is great pain in the same part, as if it were gout, you should stretch the skull as much as possible, and do not delay; and extract from the side of the head according to the quantity of virtue of the head, unless there is any other cause that prohibits fleebotomy, especially if the side from which the plague has been removed is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	When the incision is made on the opposite side of the affected part; and keep an eye on the thigh for swelling and gross veins.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If the diet forbids any food, it will be lessened in appetite and will not approach flesh or fat.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place your hand over the plague, if it happens to have apthama, cut in it and insert either olive oil or into the wound that is sterilized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of apthama caut, place your hand over the plague, if it is recently clean and the air has not changed that powder which you recommend in small amounts.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, place your hand over the scars after it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the plague is large or due to inscizio of edema and disfiguration, and not adjusted the lips of it according to puvils, place those in sutura after that suture as you recommend of the sutures of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the plague has been discovered from the bone and pen, and is not retained by it only a small suspensor, place that and apply care to the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in its place of the codena, and command the thigh that is swollen by gross veins in which they are fed: caps and form coyt and semblantz to them, after that it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If the abdomen is affected by putrid matter and does not adhere to the bone, then you should insert everything possible and apply it, and afterwards care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these plagues an artery or vein of the kind that carries off pus may occur, and is not cut off by medicine, then you should inquire about the artery, and if it is not cut, insert a spatula into it; and if this causes discomfort, then cauterize within that sore.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, the cause is easy to remove; I do not know if you should powder over those powders, which have become solid when that air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the recipe for the powder is as follows: a mixture of oil from one ense, of dragon's blood from three, and of unextinguished parts from three; all should be ground and crushed, and over that the plague should be filled, and secured with good constraint within which it lies on that part, and it should be coagulated at the sore.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And if you tighten that bandage around the ankle and secure it, and do not loosen it while she is standing, so that it does not slip off, then it will not be a hindrance to the medicine when she is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And if anyone has a cauterizing iron, when they are not present in your presence and have sanctified the dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is performed in the largest pustules when it is convenient to have it placed over them and they are straight, and recent pustules of the same saint, where the air has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered it, and especially during summer, you will not see this powder in its position, less cure those as they have said, unless you hold over those edges found more difficult, or hold over those points of the flour of the other water and honey when it has been prepared; and less cure those in another cure when they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if you happen to have a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you should use this method to treat it.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	When you describe the treatment of fractures in the head due to gout.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the evils of the colon.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the disease occurs in the colon, there is no difference in treatment, and between the headache when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the colon are inserted or the artery, then if the nerve is injured, it is not in the vein but that it is avoided cure of the patient's pain that causes vehement spasms, as it happens with the fingers and semblants to those that nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not stop on the cause of all leakage, that the substance of the nerves is leaking and the continuation of the cause is to the brain, which is pulled out from all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is treated with unnatural medicines, as it is known that the water is too hot or not, and then the thucia when the water is too hot and the other parts are rubbed afterwards according to this method, and the skin becomes moist.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the plague is large, you should administer sutures or scrape the lips of the patient, and properly care for that part after it has been cleaned.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the plague is deep or occurs in the lower part of the damaged wound, then it should be perforated at that location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If during the plague an artery has already been inscribed and a sac has been formed, then separate or dry that artery, tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent this.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spine of the pelvis has already been broken or damaged, and the veins of the colon have been saved, then adjust the edges of the wound over the coccyx of the pelvis and do not touch that; similarly, reduce that over its natural figure, and firmly stretch it in a decent manner, and tie it with a knot for each joint; and care for that in which there are stitches and excitement within which it is stimulated and becomes healthy.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already entered the bone, then examine that, and if there are fragments in it, extract all that you can from them; and what is not visible to you, tie it within which the plague may be purified and the fever be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, then powder that powder which has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the plague there is a fistula, then care for that with that which comes from the quality of the capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the colon or similar ones that occur between the thighs and are found in the spine, in the side, or in the buttocks, or in the member.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of the hams or of the chest, and sometimes of the chest itself, consider that it may be due to the plague and its ventosity when the patient's thighs ache; you know that the plague is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the plague is recent in the patient's body, you should stop there for the first hour of powdering, and do not stretch it because it is not the sac retained in the depth of the chest and returned to the heart, but an attractive one, and it is not visible at that time.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the engagement is not at your present, you should stop in the orifice of the plague cot to prevent what happens when it is full of humidity; and make the thigh sleep on the plague so that it runs water that is in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the plague has already passed three days or less and there is no spasm, tremor of the heart or stricture of the throat, and sometimes other good dispositions of the patient, you know that the plague is saved; and then cure that person with care and the other cure when it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the patient's treatment is excused and it has been a long time since it was opened, you should know that a fistula has already been made; therefore, care for that area with the capital capital.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the plague is due to scarification or incision, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or buttocks, you should treat it as follows: if it is large, use sutures; if it is small, use powder.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been an incision in the bone and the pus is already coming out of the wound, you should wrap the plague and try to extract those pus, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separate, you should lyse the entrances where the pus is crusting, as the extraction of them is difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And from the other plagues that may appear in the other members, the treatment in cure is the treatment that has been said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the stomach.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, small, or bitter.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	1. From the large number of veins and nerves in the intestines, it is caused by an insertion of theirs and a suture of theirs to be made with great force and with great subtlety.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	When a small disruption is difficult to reduce with another hand, and if it is found that the reduction of theirs is difficult, then do not hesitate to insert them into their place as much as possible, and then remove and stretch them so that the intestine of theirs is easy to reduce.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the better disruption is the most preferable, for in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is in the special cases mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You know that the stitching of the abdomen is the second most difficult, and fewer stitches are common than those used in stitches for other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other stitches are commonly used for other diseases, but they are less common in the stitching of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you every exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the disease is small and is caused by any reason of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce that, then you should use one of the following methods: either because of the difficulty of the disruption as has been said, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	When the patient has recovered, it is necessary to apply a cold compress to that part where you have submerged a sponge soaked in water alone, or that you have soaked in water mixed with cyperus, spike, and embrocation, and bring the intestine back to its place once the inflammation has been resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And if some wounds have appeared, and it is better to use water alone for the resolution of the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation being resolved, you should moisten the intestine with water in the area where it is raised and leaning, so that the intestine returns to its place with little pain.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the intestine is tightened in this treatment, you should cut the rupture with a small sharp instrument that has not yet been used.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is not cut and does not cause bleeding, and is not occupied in drawing and defecation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, shape the form of the:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	When one part of the acute pain and the other part of the dull pain, and the extremity is subtle, and it is not in the subtlety of the sweat, then it is hard for a few to understand.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	When the inflammation spreads and exits the intestine, it is necessary to reduce it according to the shape of the natural cavity, in its proper place, if possible, over there, it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back over the proper chest, and place your hands on the areas that are not touching the ground; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should stop the head of the patient and hold the chest with the parts that are not touching the ground.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you should pause your attention and consideration until then, so that the part where the inflammation is located is not touched by the other hand.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And it is necessary to administer this in great and small inflammations.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small inflammations, pause this until your preparation is ready, and make sure that the medicine is between your most important parts, holding the disruption with its whole weight and adjusting the lips of the patient, and then cover the area with a piece of cloth that causes another cut.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture method: one that grasps the uterus, according to the number of times it surrounds the placenta; and cuts at the end of the disruption of this ring, and pulls the uterus tightly, or rather, you do not put your fingers too far into the ends of the abdomen, but only the ends of the caecum that is left behind, which presses the abdomen to separate the parts of the intestine; and you have already added the ends of the abdomen and the ends of the caecum, and then you make four turns.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And if you tighten the double thread around the uterus, and some fingers of parts encompassed, and add the labia and the placenta for addition of the girth; and let the size of this one be equal to that of the first one, and fix another suture at that point where it was fastened as in the first one; and do not stop until the entire compression of the placenta is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the threads were more slender between the flesh and subtlety, four of the slender threads should penetrate the flesh little by little; and the thick ones are difficult to insert into the abdomen, therefore for this reason they must be both slender and thick.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted at the extremities of the present chain of bones, because if the flesh is not deeply incised and the plague oozes before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the sutures are not extended so that the plague is not forbidden from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And if you cut the ends of the needles so that they do not pierce the thigh, and place your hand over the expanded powdered part of the suture, which holds the ends of the needles; and leave them as soon as you know that the plague has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of sutures with needles in hand are convenient for small plagues, which are enough in the suture with an needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is similar: and it is that you administer through the suture to the four extremities of the chain, from the thigh and hip extremities of the cuff, in a line, with a needle in which there is a fair envelope engagement in subtility and grossness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle of that particular metal from which it began, so that the true casing catches the subcutaneous part that was previously sutured, so that the stitch is the next stitch of the thread from which those threads were strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the amount of the thickest part of that particular nail.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitch bores the men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch sews the plague that was injured on a man in his abdomen, which was infected with a gallstone, and was the rupture of the plague larger than a palm, and was inflamed by the intestines around two palms of the intestine of the lower part of the abdomen, and was the disruption in the abdomen; and then you reduce that which the bowel had suffered from the plague for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space for fifteen days or more, and was cured that which was cared for and became healthy; and afterwards, it is quiet for many years, and is discussed in its own positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; and per miracle, focus, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mais pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que focus sanat.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	Mays (may be a typo or a misspelling) and "diyre" is not a standard word in any of the languages you mentioned. However, I can still try to translate the sentence based on the context and the languages you provided.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	This line seems to be discussing different types of sutures or stitches. Here's a possible translation: "And that is why you use the sutura de la codena (which I assume means a specific type of suture), and insert the needle from the side opposite the partida deforo (which could mean the side where the wound is not as
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	This line seems to be describing the process of inserting a needle and thread for suturing. Here's a possible translation: "And so, when the needle penetrates into the codena (which I assume is a specific type of material or fabric) and through the ligaments on both sides, and leaves the extremity of the cipherac (which could be a specific part of the body or a tool) where you inserted the needle; and then let the other end of the thread pass through the partida dedintz (which I assume is another specific part of the body or a tool) to the partida deforo (which could mean the opposite side) on the other end of the mihat (which could be a tool or a part of the body).
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	This line seems to be continuing the description of the suturing process. Here's a possible translation: "And when you have made that penetration, you will make another one in the other end of the mihat (which could be a tool or a part of the body) on the opposite side of the partida deforo (which could mean the opposite side) to the partida dedintz (which I assume is another specific part of the body); and then remove the extremity of the cipherac (which could be a specific part of the body or a tool) from this position, and let the needle penetrate into the other end of the partida dedintz (which could be a specific part of the body) to the partida deforo.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When the member is inserted into that which it should enter, and that which it should enter is at the end of the urethra in the extremity of the urethra, that which is entered is then completely inserted.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin at that side and cut through to the end of the urethra that is at the other end of the urethra, and remove the point of the needle that penetrated, and return it to the socket and cover the end of the urethra that is on this side; and remove the part of the needle from the socket.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make another incision and another, and make another incision in the same way that you cut everything that is deformed after that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the total of this suture is that you cut the skin suture of the skin that cuts the hair, in other words that you cut the urethra a second incision at the end of the socket, and that sees the other incision after it is filled.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of suture is the one that Guy de Champagne prescribes, and this is for the purpose of the patient and according to his recommendation, it is that you cut that second incision at the place where the physicians cut that, in other words that you add all parts of its corresponding part to the natural part; and they apply the end of one side to the other end of the side, and this is done according to what I recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When the needle is placed at the tip of your thumb, and it pierces through to the other end, and you feel two ends of the cincture; then rotate the needle and make it pierce from the one end to the other through the cincture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then rotate those points, and make each one of the ends of the intestine pierce through to the other end within the space between the thighs, on opposite sides of the needle.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This suture is better than the common suture, and it is the suture that precedes remembrance.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Guile.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	If they do not understand this, the suture of the stomach is corrected by two needles, so that you enter them at each point with a suitable needle, and begin with the intromission of the needle that you must use, and make it pierce through to the other side according to the sutura of those that cause the engagement of the curls.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when the disruption occurs in your stomach's location, the suture of it is difficult to do than in other parts of the stomach.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medicine for plague is made by the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you manage to catch the recent plague in the presence of the saint, and reduce the intestine and belly there, and make them suitable for that purpose, you place your hand over that earthly powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has already changed the wound, then stop over those acupuncture points which are located in front of you when they make hard stones and crush the fields, and they become solid and noticeable; and pay attention to that air as if it were the care of other diseases when it is cured.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have access to medicines, then stop over those acupuncture points, because it will start to get wet, cut it, and exchange the two veins in the day, as you and I do, when the diseases are simple, and you will not need other medicine in time when the plagues are easy.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may spread to the main limbs, then cover that you submerge lion's wool in olive oil of good quality, or in red oil, and stop it in the circuit of the locs which are between the ankles and then the asses.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the intestines, then more veins should be removed, and you should cristerize that am with black stiptic, and mainly if the perversion is spread in the intestine and it makes an exit penetrating into the cavity of the conquavit.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the remedy for a large intestine is different from that for the small intestine.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to cure the intestine called "gout" because it does not receive plague from the blood that enters it; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it, as well as its size, and its subtlety of structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If this is the case that you are treating with blood, and you achieve that, then reduce those intestines that are causing the constipation.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been passed through that space and you have already done well, then what you should do is press on the location that is being denigrated by the foot, in order that fluids come out of the veins and arteries that are in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And if you insert that which is another, and pause the extremities of the line until the part from which the plague has been removed is no longer affected, so that above you may be relieved of the attraction of the same by the tightness of the tissue and the emission of the plague duct.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	The first line of the text is a memory or reminder of the diseases that occur when one suffers from the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestines and it is small, it is possible that it can be recovered in some patients, as was previously affected by the intestines in the lower belly due to percussion with a hammer and it was the plague of the part of the stomach, and the plague was an old fistula and it was a sign of the management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you continue the cure of the patient even if it was not confident in the care of the doctor, but I stop to subtly touch that part where the fire heals and the place is solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you push that the place is already solidified, then touch over the thigh that covers the accident of the mal in the lower belly; and do not encounter any other mal accident and rumors in the mouth of its dispossession eating and drinking, and return to bath and exercise in your words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And it has been told to experienced patients that when the plague occurs in the intestines and it is small, it is possible that it can be handled according to this method: and it is that you take large gauze; and adjust the lips of the plague and stop a gauze over the lips of the plague; therefore, when you touch them and tighten your mouth, the cap of the plague adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	When another flea has been found, and you do not stop making them until the total amount of the plague is found.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce that and see what the plague is; and remove those attached to the intestine when it is cured, and do not cause any harm to the thighs.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It may be possible that the intestine has hidden something subtle that is made of animal matter, which is more like a needle; and it is that you hold the end of those intestinal threads, and it is dirty, and you pull it out, and enter it among the needles and what is in that intestine, and reduce it in disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This suturing of fleas is not the only way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the hidden thighs, then you should not rely solely on subtle manipulation, and it is not cured from top to bottom.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	This text appears to be a medieval medical treatise discussing various medical procedures and conditions. Here's a line-by-line
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You should know that both plague and gangrene occur when they are left untreated and become infected, and do not heal or abscess, and in any member of the body, they are universally called fistula and are referred to as that inflammation.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, which is true, is characterized by being nodular, hard, white, and not painful, but convoluted like the convolutions of the brain; and for that reason it is called the pus pit, that is, the brain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in the pus pit there is moisture that abscesses the skin; and if it is very wet, it will be divided in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some people find this moisture to be thin, little, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	You have already said in the division that the plagues are similar to wounds, and all wounds that are not healed or not seen in their natural state, are not known except for one of these causes: which is that it is due to a lack of cure in the flesh; or due to malice in him; or that between him and the lips there is hard flesh prohibited by nature; or that it is due to moisture seen; or that the matter that is put into it is poisonous and the material that is in the tramesa is of bad quality; or that the medicine is not appropriate for the cure of him; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is a pestilence; or due to the property of the region as it is in Saragossa, where it is difficult to digest the maladies, and it is delayed in the cure of gangrene for nature; or that there are one or more bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When all those causes have been shown, and their symptoms and the cure of them in the division, then comes the first source sentence to translate:
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	When you have finished making the incision, you will know the cure for the fistula that is made by the operation of the vessel.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	You know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; four of them are fistulas that reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the bladder, or the vesica, or to any part of the costal cartilages, or to any part of the spine of the two, or to any part of the joints composed of parts of the thigh and the foot; and those that are close to the main member and resemble.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And of these fistulas that follow this method are those of difficult cure, and do not receive cure, and occupation is given to that which is worked on and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach those places that were said, and you hope and trust in the cure of the same, and you want to know it, then try to make it wide or narrow with iron, and if the fistula follows correctly, and look for that am the same.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, investigate whether that subtle temptation of subtle flow is causing the light to leak and curve the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula has many horrible aspects, it is not possible for you to understand what I mean about this point.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	When Christ is performed by one's own hands, four things are necessary: the humidity through which that wound must be cleaned from the other wounds and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	If you examine carefully, according to which hand you can use if you have bones or nerves here, and whether it is the confluence of the long or short fistula, or if it is a fistula that is the orifice of your member and it is entirely under the sum of your strength, the sum of your endurance, the one that enters the thigh and the cure of the wound, and the relief of the pain must be under the compression of your hand on the spot, and seeming like the significance and causes of the accident to the patient.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	When you have been over all those causes and you see the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider if it is an apparent fistula near or in place, long from joint, or from nerve, or from artery, or from vein, or from one of the places that you have and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula according to what is said about the necrosis of the part, and leave that which is in that filtration and of corrupted meat, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh or in the semblance, and cure that which is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	When the fistula is of long depth, and follows the rectum, one should cover it with the hand as much as possible, and modify it from all corrupted parts; and administer enveloped needles in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with your iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And if you find some weeds inside that the sharp medicine damages all that is in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And restore those that cause the growth of healthy flesh inside when it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not cured by that much, you should cauterize the same next time as they have advised.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	When the cause of the fistula is known and you must certify this, you should investigate that and dry it secondly as they have advised, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as they have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	When the cause of the hole is known and you find in it any corruption or blackness, you should remove that within which the corruption is hosted; and cure that part with the remedy that you use when it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If the wound is not healthy and does not heal as it should, you know that you have not achieved total eradication of corruption; and then you discover the second part and carefully make the reason for the wound and the molding of the body according to the same force, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, then so be it; and if not, you know that this corruption is in the depths of the heart, which has not been achieved, and then for you there is no other recourse but to accept that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bones are corrupted, or you can remove that, you know that you can use forceps of a subtle nature to do so.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if those bones are corrupted, you carefully make the extraction of all those, and those that do not have any cause due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If you have any contradiction to the cause of the humors, and in them there is no fear or error, you insert those limbs or tendons if they are here, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you do not prepare the bones of your body, place your hand over the wound that will dress the wound with the plague that is present in the surrounding bones and muscles, and keep the plague that is not yet solidified, and strengthen the cut that you have made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear, stop on the underwater cotton that is wet with oil, or the underwater cotton that is submerged in Egyptian anguish, or in the corner of the engorged veins, when those limbs are purified, and the bones are separated from the abscess, and the collected matter is removed.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If there is a great amount of bone in the thigh or calf, and that part of it becomes corrupted, then you should remove that much bone as possible, and afterwards restore the joint.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the part of the bone that is corrupted is large, and the corruption has reached the medulla of the bone, then you must close that and the other total, and enter into the location where the corruption has spread, and cure that within which it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you go to a man in his thigh for that he stops that part and supports you with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about 30 years old was found to have pain in his thigh, and there were many parts of the matter in the body that entered the thigh, and it was apostema of great apostema, and I did not find this cause extrinsic.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	When the time comes that the aposteme is opened, and the materials are moved, and the focus curacy is paused within where the focus hole was made, and there are points on it that all get redness and wetness of the skin, then those points are cut off.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after many years of studying medicine, and not knowing that focus was in those parts, but in the art, when you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the hole of the focus and the materials that came out of it, those wounds were very large and the color of the flesh was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then you inserted the tent into one of those wounds and it reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And you examined all the wounds and found those that reached the bone in all parts of the hole.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then you cut it and placed your hand over one of the wounds, and described a part of the bone, and it was rotten and corrupted and deformed; and it was already corrupted a part of the hole that had penetrated into the flesh.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I apply this that I had discovered and prepared from the discovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	When the joint is not in the bone but in that corruption which was cut off and sewn up, and you have already torn it apart.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then place your hand on the restoration of the plague by conservative medicine for a long time, but it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you will continue to explore and discover the bones second, over the first discovery, and find continued corruption in the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I believe that this corruption appears to you from that, and then you will perform proper treatment for the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discovered another vein and did not stop inserting the bones one by one particularly and performing the restoration of the os, but it was not restored until you inserted it around a palm of the bone, and that extracted from the medulla of your bone, and then the medicine repaired that, and it was consolidated slightly and became healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to repeat the operation and section of the bone only because of the disposition of the abdomen and the lack of tolerance of the patient and the power of the mort, that caused the accident in all hours for the superfluity of evacuation without sincopi mala.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	This sentence seems to be discussing the process of healing and the importance of proper body positioning. It states that complete healing can only be achieved through complete care, and there should be no hardness in the body. The person's posture in the standing position is good, and they return to their virtuous state. The sentence also mentions discussing one's dispositions and not doing anything contrary to the body's needs or causing harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If you are standing in the chest area and have already reached that second position of the maneuver: and it is that you grasp the limb and stretch it to the end of that standing area, and command that one extends this limb along their own; and then stretch that limb with a piece of wool as thick as the first one; and place that limb over the flesh that you leave in the standing area, and extend the extension of it so that it touches the parts left, and you discover the flesh over the location that you want to suture so that the suture does not hurt the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause for a moment the table to the left of the feet, which when you perform is not prohibited the suture that does not cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And make sure that the suture is over the small area of corruption, which if it is in the concavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance at the sensation, and then for the suture of the other one watched.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bones are corrupted and not standing, then advance one part continuously to the other, and the corruption is either at the end or in the beginning of it; and then discover all the flesh of all parts; and pause for a moment there, and suture that of the first part where the corruption is within which the suture is continued of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	When the gout is located in a specific part of the body where corruption has occurred, as they have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is in the joint, insert the affected joint, and secure the bones with nails in the adjacent part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If the corruption is in the continuation of several joints, it is not necessary to be in that reason but to engage.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the shoulder of the arm or the foot, it is very difficult; but I ask you to inform me about the corruption in what way it appears to you, and remove that, and adapt it according to each position you can, and make sure it is correctly adapted for you, unless it causes pain to the veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You know what is suitable for incisions and the size of the screws to be inserted into these bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and size and fineness, and their hardness and rarity; so that I ask you to prepare everything for the complete operation with the instrument that is most convenient for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You know that this operation means for you on the specific of the instrument you requested; when you have great knowledge and long experience in the handling of these hands, and testimony of hands in diseases, where labors already you have done what is convenient for you according to the instruments in all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should form in the end of this chapter the number of the instruments that you will use according to their simplicity and those which you will process to experience the same on others.
Forma de serra:	Formation of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of a saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another large form of a saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray should be according to the form of the star-shaped lock, and its points should be according to the shape of the steel points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not seem otherwise that they are crushed with the heads of the joints when they are corroded, or that the mouth is very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of the other major razors:
Forma de razori menor:	The first line of the text is not in English, but in a language that is somewhat similar to
Forma de razori lat:	I apologize for the confusion earlier. Here's the translation of the first line:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The translation of the first line is: "Forma of a smaller razor: it is called a point of the foot that is sharp and the edge of the blade, and the member of the hand holds it down.
Forma de lu:	The translation of "Forma de lu" is: 
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	The translation of "Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat" is: "The form of the razor in which it
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The translation of "Forma de razori autra subtil" is: "The form of another soft r
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The translation of "Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat" is: "The form of another razor with a curved end.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The translation of "Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta" is: "The form of a small razor resembling
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The translation of "Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses" is: "The form of the teeth that cut the bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The translation of "Forma de inscisori autra minor" is: "The form of another smaller too
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The translation of "Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:" is: "The form of another tooth, resembling a ray, and its end is shaped like a serrated edge, and it is displayed in various locations in the bone ridge.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The form of the bone that corresponds to the ratio of that which is perforated by the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	When the end of the body is triangular and sharp-pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	When iron of India is used, it seems that all causes that have been said of razors and scissors and shears are correct.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the cutting edge of the scissor and the clamping of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be dirty either from an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the medicine does not cure, sometimes the corruption comes from a member that does not feel any cause, it seems that you have carefully inserted that member into this one so that the evacuated part escapes from death or malice which is the greatest defilement of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happened, it is because that member was black inside when it was that which was burned, or it can be placed properly the blackness inside that entered that member which seized the whole body and took hold of all the limbs; and then you should inscribe that member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And it seems that if it is a cause of corruption by the impact of some venomous causes, as from the sting of the scorpion or from something like the viper or from the nettle and similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If corruption or trauma is at the end of the part, you should insert the point and do not leave space for the corruption to enter the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If it seems that you are able to access the mouth, then you should insert your hand into the throat, and do not leave space for corruption to enter when you hold onto the shoulder of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If that is not possible, then insert your hand into the arm through the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another corruption passes and surrounds the joint, then that is the death of the patient; and administering another cause another in treatment is a matter of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When it seems that there is corruption in the foot, and if you wish to cut into that entrance, you should do so at one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you grasp the foot, then you should cut through the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it may enter the denial, then you should cut into the cushion at the joint of the denial.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has already spread over the denial, then you should not attempt to operate there, and leave the body to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The tool for cutting or sealing the member is that you strain the limb in the part where you wish to cut, and stretch another limb over the place; and extend the minister over the parts that are left, and extend another minister on its sides; and you separate the flesh that is between two limbs, and cut or seal it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover that there is a stop of the limb for all parts that do not touch the place, and that it comes to the body with the injured part adjusted and the suture in place.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If something happens to the wound when it is being operated on, then you should cauterize the affected area or place some powders that restrain the wound; and then return to your treatment once it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And tightly bind the affected member with a suitable bandage, and care for that once it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I advise you to go to a doctor in the city, this accident which happened to you and to me, which I recommended, was actually caused by the negro in the city who was assembled for combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurred in the city's leg when it was completely in the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for his wounds that were pushed to the member with great velocity because of the pain and inflammation of the member, and immediately he entered the joint, and the focus became healthy.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago, an accident happened to you in that corruptness of the said member in the indicated part.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I won, and so I perforated to reflect that superfluity which was placed over the part of medicines, the worlding of the body; and it is not reflected the superfluity and then began to go to another part that started in the part.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	When the doctor inserted his hand into the patient's groin, and he did not intend to do so out of fear of the repercussion of that superfluity, and rather than feigning the insertion of the doctor's hand into the patient's groin, the virtue of the groin was overcome by fatigue.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And I thought that he would die, returned to his earth and came to me that the man prepared and inserted his hand completely, and was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not related this story except for being an assistant on this matter, and that it is significant for this affliction, and that it is meaningful according to which it is followed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Cure of the sinus and quality of the claustrification with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in the flesh of the leg, and the space of the abscess is prolonged within which it collects waste, and then bursts and perforates, and the waste is removed from the body, and the location is cleaned as if it were new, and the stitch that was removed from it was as fine as silk, and no corruption was found in the bone or nerve or tendon, it is called a sinus, and it is not called an abscess.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	When however, the space is extended within which corruption presses on some member, it is called a fistula and we do not know.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure of the wound is that it is inserted into that codelet in such a way as to revolve, and especially when it is subtly made and becomes like thread, and is comfortable so as not to adhere to the place for its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the codelet adheres and that this corruption will not be achieved by subsequent consequence, and if there is any face in the codelet, you treat it with antiseptic.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that you see is of a good odor, you antisepticize that Egyptian medicine which is of oil and vinegar and zinc received parts equally, and are adjusted in a vessel, and are placed over the focus within which the medicine is cut rog and penetrates a certain part of the honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and antisepticize that sinus, and strengthen the opening of it, and place the medicine in it according to the number of hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And remove that precious part; and do this for several days until the sinus is softened and the skin is moistened.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And if some wounds are burned with fire, when you cannot present this medicine; and that is when you take the fire of vitz, and put it over the water; and then apply that to it within a short time if you find that this sinus has closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the thigh does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the fire of ash, then apply that water to it and mix some honey with a little oil, and apply that to it and mix some honey with a little more oil, until the property of honey makes it shiny and clean, and the sinu adheres to it, especially when you see a superfluity of sterility and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you make the medicine for some wounds and you find that the sinus has become moistened, then apply that water to it to make the flesh softer in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	It is necessary to take the ointment for the final application and dissolve that red oil with stiptic; or to add some medicines to the ointment and apply other ointments that have the properties that I have already written about in the book on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the orifice of the sinus is straight and not received by the cannula of the clisteri, then you must increase that oil little by little, and stop in its wrapped enveloped in Egyptian ointment or Basilicon ointment when it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the orifice is wide, then you must add the lips of the ointment seal to the quantity that is between the clisteri and its addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifice of the part where the bracelet is elevated is dry, then you must moisten that in the basal location that it is in so that the bracelet can come out further, when the bracelet is cut in the pre-delivery state of the flesh being in the engendered one.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible for you to moisten the sinus within the environment of the basal bone according to what you want, then you must pierce that member in preparation for the one that correlates with the bracelet as much as possible according to what is in your appearance and that is not held by any cause of the bracelet.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	When you have solidified ointments that are applied over the appropriate sinew to extend those over the clothing of the leg,
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the clothing is of great quantity so that communication is made of the entire sinew; and place an incision at the right side of the orifice of the sinew a puls large enough for the orifice of the sinew; and extend over other clothing of the leg according to the amount of the pulse, and place it over that for long position of the orifice of the sinew so that the swelling of the knee does not remain in the great clothing for more than a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	As much as that is over the orifice of the sinew, which remains in total for the time that it hurts according to what is set in the brace.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And by what you know if the pain of the brace is much or little, or is not digested, or is not.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And do you also consider the location of that sinew, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in the postematoma.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medical treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that adheres to the sinu orifice has already adhered, or is approaching adhesion, then hold the discharge or the third day, and when you release the pus, hold the cloth in another position and renew the dressing.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If the sinu has too much space and subtle viruses under it, you should not despair of the adhesion of the pus, for the treatment of the wound is appropriate, for those who have a slow generation of skin in these plagues, and for those who have the opposite of the pus.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinu has been infected for several days and is swollen, you should know that the sinu does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinu is delayed and is the cause of prolonged treatment, you should adjust the medicines in desiccation, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they become dry like pus when adjusted with an excess of addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	When the most urgent care is needed, it is necessary to take out the dead tissue and dissolve it in olive oil, and place it on the wound with an antiseptic gauze, and cover it with that to keep it clean.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to work in that case, when there is no brace, and the dead tissue is removed, and it is wrapped with cloth and powdered with the same powder as before, and covered with cloth and held tight; and the same powder is applied to the part where the dead tissue was previously removed, and powdered over and held tight.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some preparations are administered by the physician for long-term use and are made from lily of the valley (and lily of the valley), flour, centaury, and chamomile, and use those simple or adjusted, mix them and powder over the olive oil that I recommended, and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, you should know that the corruption is in the prey of the wound, and make an investigation in the bones or in other hard bones or ligaments; then you can treat it with the same curative procedure as before.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	This sentence seems to be discussing a medical treatment involving the removal of dead skin cells (panarici), nail clipping (unguis), and cutting of the finger tip (incisione digititi). The term "sectione" might refer to further division
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	This sentence appears to be describing the process of removing dead skin cells (panarici) from the feet or hands, and how it can lead to further damage or corruption of the nail bed (ungla). If left untreated, this can cause the nail to become thick and discolored. The treatment involves cutting away the dead skin cells and allowing the nail to heal, either through natural processes or by using a cautery.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	If you do not feel comfortable with the treatment that has been recommended, you should cover the affected area with a bandage to prevent further infection. It is recommended to use a cautery to cauterize the wound, as it can help to stop the bleeding and promote healing. However, it is important to note that cauterization should be performed by a qualified medical professional to avoid any potential complications.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is healthy and the nail is intact, and the corners of the nail are not damaged, you can continue to trim the nail using a pair of scissors or cuticle roller. However, if the nail is thick or damaged, it is recommended to consult a medical professional for further treatment. It is important to avoid damaging the nail bed and surrounding skin, as this can lead to further complications. If the nail becomes infected, it may be necessary to seek medical attention immediately.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	When corruption has already set in within the bones, you should cover the affected bone and its surrounding area, as none of the bones can be healed if corruption is present within them.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you notice the corrosion and corruption approaching, then you should insert that into one of the nails according to what is recommended for its rememoration, and afterwards care for it as soon as it becomes healthy again.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is pain at the ankle or knee, and the pain is very intense, then you should immediately cut the thigh, and thoroughly cleanse the ankle with salt water, and make sure that the incision does not enter the flesh that you have just exposed, so that when you apply the pain to the thigh, it causes a cause of unnecessary flesh in the place; and then care for this area with what gives relief from pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	If it is too tight, which is natural in most men, very much flesh, and very much bones, or very much in the ankle.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And if the flesh of it is born in the joints, or is the origin of its flesh in the nails of the toes.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And that which is born in the nails of the toe is not bad, and this which is born in the joints is very bad.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those which are born with flesh, the incision is less, and it is that you must make the incision on its own skin.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	When a person is born with joint pain in a certain part of the body, the treatment is difficult; therefore, it is important to avoid the abscess of that area.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the one who is not born from the nuts, know that you have inserted the flesh of the arm into the bone, and then press with one of those convenient forceps, and then care for that inside which is healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	When the consolidation is complete, which occurs when the joints are affected by worn-out movements or are naturally present in the person who has not been seen yet, or due to the consolidation of plague or combustion of fire, or for appearances, it is certain that the consolidation has succeeded when those joints return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And pause between them if the enfused parts are not completely consolidated and separate them, or pause between those with a thin layer of plum substance so that it is consolidated afterwards if it is certain.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If it appears that consolidation has occurred in certain joints of the body, then dry those joints according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the circumcision, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are, and the veins are wrapped with large, full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come out of the members of the body, and the most frequent occurrence is in the cavities, and especially in the cavities of itinerant workers and laborers and wearers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	When you begin to administer purification of the heart of black blood with some strong expelling forces, and draw blood from the basilar vein of the patient.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The second method of treatment is as follows: the first hand is to cut and burn that black sin, and the other hand raises the vein and draws out all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The cutting of the sin is done according to this hand: the surgeon begins by making a cut in the vein that enters as soon as the black sin is resolved, which is feculent from the vein, and tightens the vein at the tip of the thigh opposite the denial of the dark sin, and soaks the vein in one or two or three wide sections, and raises the black sin at the ankle above the tip of the denial of the vein into it, and presses it into juice, as soon as the black sin is enough and how many times you want, and that allows the virtue of the thigh.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then apply it, and command the patient to abstain from black blood-producing vegetables.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	When the veins are dilated and it is noted in the groin, it is customary to perform a fleebotomy.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	You raise the groin, if it is swollen, and place the hand in the cavity and massage the groin until it returns to its original position and the veins are engorged; or if it is exercised with a strong exercise, if the hand is not available, then massage this member.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And cut the cord at the right of the vein to separate it in length or in the depth of the vein, or in the base of the vein, you need to remove the tissue.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And open the cord with an incision and exert force on the vein throughout its length until it is felt, and you must feel the vein that sometimes becomes darker than the surrounding tissue.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you cut the cord, you see white threads that are threads.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And place the needle further in the groin that is raised and tightened around the cord, and hold it with your other hand.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	When another section is needed, cut it approximately three inches long and scrape the cord of the area that appears inside the vein.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then insert that and take out the rest of it within the second section, and take out the part from the second section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then put that inside what you took out from the section above or from all the sections, and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you do not obey and extract and raise it, insert a needle of strong double thread and tie it to that and take out the thread, or insert the rope now and turn your hand around all the part that is getting wet.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to insert it; if it is cut, it will be difficult to raise that hand and it will come over the thigh for that wound.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that is completely outside, place your hand over the location of the wet hair that is submerged in vinegar and red oil and non-red oil, and care for that inside which is cured.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the pain is obstructed by tortuosity that involves all parts, and there is no right angle to follow, then you should cover that area with your hand over the entire tortuosity of the pain and the areas of encumbrance, and suspend it at that point where it rises.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And keep your section from cutting the vein and causing inflammation; that will be difficult for you to raise it; and use your caution in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incision made by the pain is:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of a gout point:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not the acute point that is made as a cautery but with a blunt end and so it does not cut the vein; and it is of great flexibility, which if it were subtle, would cut the vein by its subtlety; there are in it too much bulkiness than they have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the thigh vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the lowlands of the land that is like the Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the lowlands of India, which are dry and lacked in vegetation and there is neither grass nor bush.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	When the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate other parts of the body, it is called gout by doctors.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The treatment of the wound is putrid, and I see from here that the bowel comes out of the abdomen due to venomous snakes, serpents, scorpions, and vermin, which are born between the bowel and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The susceptibility of the occurrence of the wound is due to this vein that happens in the abdomen that is inflamed with great intensity; and the place is sore; and the vein begins to appear from the place of that sore, which seems to be raised like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when you see the end of the wound, you will notice that you envelop it over with one hand, as if it were the foot of a dragon. Enter into her, and note that one, and let down the foot suspended from the abdomen.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times have you seen the wound cause any defect in the parts around it, envelop it in a plop and let it down.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, you will insert a part of the wound and envelop it around; and do not insert that which is raised inside until it is outside, but if you insert that which is contrary, enter into the flesh and make an opening for the gangrene and ulceration in the place and the ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	When the affected area is treated and small amounts are extracted at a time, it should be removed from the body cavity and not left inside the body without any cause in the chest.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	This vein is found in many men who have a long distance of x palms and depth, and I have already heard that one has a length of xx palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is inserted at the time of medication, introduce the needle into the wound and perforate that long wound through the chest, entering if everything can be evacuated from the matter, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medications; and cure that part with the cure of bandages.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein has some bumps, and they are more noticeable when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it can cause pain to the orifice, and it is found in many orifices.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And cure that part as has been said in the division and according to what has been said.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of the superior veins generated under the skin and it is called oxid.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This malady is called by the bovine disease because of the motions that are seen in the bones and it is very rare for it to be found between the ribs and the lungs, and it spreads throughout the whole body and causes great pain, and it is shown by the sensation that one feels in the members when they are disrupted and come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of this one is due to the putrefaction of certain humors that accumulate with worms, snakes, and insects, and feces in the intestines.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the wickedness of the patient, that when he goes into the body and rises to the head, and comes out at the mouth, if one forcefully sits on him and enters and destroys the mouth, then various unwanted movements occur.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Then when you want to cure this and remove it, do not hesitate to use the anal and abdominal area of the patient, and then tightly hold onto that which is over him and what is further away from him, and carefully moisten over him and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is stuck in the flesh and does not come out, then you must stop cauterizing over the spot where it remains, and the main cause of fear is corruption of the part that corrupts the place as they have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you ever see that it has gone to the head of the throat, then hold tightly on the overlying part with a strong constriction, and moisten over him, and extract that; and cover that this evil is used for the transformation of the healthy body by means of corrupting humors that are eliminated by medicines, and keep away from those that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called "gout" in our country, and it causes pain in various parts of the body, and is often transferred from one part to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	When you have already seen that which I previously advised.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to attend a woman in a village who had a swollen arm, and I noticed a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after an hour, I saw that inflammation disappear as if silver were being poured into it, but I did not understand why, as if silver were being poured into a location.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain in that place remained and settled in the muscle, and after an hour, I applied...
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	...and corrected the other arm so that it did not occur in the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	I advised you to roll over the entire body so that you see the other side; and I was very surprised by the exchange of the parts and the speed of the limbs.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	When you had already seen this in the best hands, but you have seen worse that suffer terrible pain to exchange limbs for members.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have not seen this in the hands as it is in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	When I first realized that it was not gout, but rather something else, it was because the woman was very young, with a slender body and visible veins, and at that moment I noticed the sensation of a peculiar pulsation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this retrocausal treatment does not appear in those who are delicate and have humors that are not clotted with veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you want to treat the patient and they feel pain, then you should not immediately appear at their bedside as they have been told, but rather stay near them and carefully examine the area and then cauterize the spot where that peculiar pulsation is located.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not see the wounds of the patient's body, then treat the wound of the chest and expel the peculiar pulsations, and carminatives such as those in the pills made from saffron, serapin, and semblants.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of sage.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sage is diverse according to the species and locations on the body where it is picked, where the diversity lies in those that have large points, and small, concave, and narrow ones, and solid ones; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues, and of those that have stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	When the second member or limb is affected, two types of hands are used: those that cause pain in the head, heart, lungs, and bronchi, and those that cause pain in the legs, testicles, bladder, and uterus; and when you see that in one of these members or limbs there is a sign of death, which causes you to recommend proper care, you should cover that member with your hand so that you do not extract from that death in those where it appears more seriously, and if you do not see these signs in the first members or limbs, and the sauce does not cause pain in the depth of the member, you should extract that and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the symptoms of death appear in the member or limb, and the bones pass, and it is seen that the cerebrum is over the head, which happens due to strong pain, vertigo, and fainting, and convulsions in the limbs, inflammation and spasm of the tongue, and swelling and permixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and much of the word is cut off and destroyed, and it is seen that the place of the moistened member is white-like polls, and it is seen that the sign appears at the opening of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	If you see these signs in the patient's condition, then avoid further treatment and extraction of the gallbladder, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the gallbladder is located in the abdomen, close to the left side of the uterus, and if there is pain in that area, and no swelling or fever is present; and if the movement of the gallbladder resembles the movement of the hand, and the pulse is black and cold, and the extremities are cold and clammy, and there is no sweating; then you know that death is near.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	If the gallbladder has inflamed the lung and caused it to cough up phlegm from the lungs, and the vessels that are supposed to be in the chest are affected, and the color of the thigh changes, and great amounts of air are exhaled, and there is a strong desire for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the gallbladder is located in the abdominal wall that is near the chest, and the pain occurs in the small costal cartilages, and there is a great amount of sharp pain and difficulty in breathing, and not all muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the sago is found in the stomach, it is necessary to take a large dose of antidiarrheal medication.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the sago is found in the stomach and becomes stuck there, or in the intestines, or hernia, and there is no hope for the removal of the sago, then...
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the sago is found in the bladder and causes deformed urine, and there is any cause for the deformed parts, and there is severe pain in the thighs, then you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Other parts of the body are similar to the face, neck, and groin, as well as the spine, vertebrae, clavicles, and shoulders, and the clavicle and shoulder blade, and their appearance is saved when the sago does not block the veins or arteries and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And you recommend this to me that I have seen of the nature of these sages, because it has significance for the cure of the second kind.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This cause is, fourth in a man who has a headache in the temple of his head, and you extract it from another part, then the gray of the aurelius of his head, and it heals, and does not worsen in the headache of his.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	You extract another headache from the Jew who has it in the gray matter of his brain, then the eyelid of the eye, and the headache was already hidden and not caused by that or only by a small part of it that adhered to the eye's fist, and it was a great headache of the acute headaches of the Turks, and it had a leon in which there were no aurelias.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Senate is the Jew, and it does not worsen in the eye's fist accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	You extract another headache from the Christian who has it in the gallbladder, and it was an Arabian headache, and that was the one with aurelias; and then you inserted it over the guide-guide of that, and it was submerged in the gallbladder of him; and then you subtly took it out, and extracted it, and the Christian heals.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	When a man was found to have a gallstone in his knee, and the abscess had consolidated over it, and it had been there for about five years, and the gallstone was in the middle of the thigh, then...
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who had a gallstone in her abdomen, and the abscess had consolidated around it, and it had not changed in its position in relation to the uterus, and the woman did not suffer any inconvenience in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who had a gallstone in his face, and the abscess was consolidated around it, and the abscess was not causing any pain, and it did not seem to be affecting these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the gallstone from the man of the first king who had it in his lower belly and had already declined to the right side of a small one, and the entire gallstone was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to attend to the man's gallstone within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you removed the abscess of the gallstone with great effort; and then you asked that woman what she had been doing subtly, and did not feel it later, but I felt a sharp pain in my chest, and then I wondered if that pain was from the end of the gallstone.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	When the location is placed where it is most attractive and digestive, depending on my belief that this location is chosen by me for the location of the sacred, over which I have power.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	When no accident occurs in the location that you have successfully reached; and you continue to apply pressure on it for several days without any accident; and the plague becomes consolidated, and the wound of the extremity of the foot occupies space for several days until one day the midwife notices that the woman's nose is red and retracts this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you place your hand over the acute, corrosive medicinal plague for several days after it has been cut, and you apply the tincture to that, and scrape off the tip of the plant, which adheres to the stone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust the plant according to the acute medicinal plague within which I can see the tip of the plant, and it takes some time for the space between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then you focus on the amplified, corrosive plague, and focus your forceps within it, and maintain that, and do not neglect subtlety and innovation in manipulating those with engagement, when I began to use the forceps to cut off the tip of the plant, following which I extracted that; and then restored that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And the doctors said that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and you restored it and the plague was consolidated, and the wound was healed for the entire health, and there was no return to that in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some saetas for which you pause this rule and its significance about this that I have not said, that the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood by me in narration or not understand those free.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The artificer savvy compares a few things about this; and it seems that what is present is the same as what is absent; and the new operation and the new instrument are needed for the descent of the strange causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And now you say that nails are not outside the members in which they are embedded, except for two hands: either by attraction of the place where the intestine is inserted, or by the opposite side of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When that which is entered into the body or arises from flesh is seized and expelled, it is called a gout.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If one does not obey the hour when it is time to cat, it is likely that you will lay down for a certain number of days until the flesh surrounding the body becomes inflamed and attracts the disease and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If it remains in the bone and does not obey your call for excrement, you will lie down for a certain number of days and continue to attract and moisten in every day, and it has already been expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If one does not obey your call for excrement for a certain number of days, it is likely that you will dig into the circuit of the gout in that bone of all parts that are affected by the gout, and it will be extracted from there.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the gout is fixed in the skull and has already passed through one of the lobes of the brain, and appears in the thighs of those accidents which you have told me, it is best not to extract the gout and lie down for a certain number of days until it is equal to the prolonged one; if the gout is fixed in the liver, the death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the saddle is not found only in the body of the bone, and does not pass through the cavity, and the hernia is reduced for several days, and no harm comes to it from these accidents, then you should focus on the saddle and the hernia.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If the saddle is stuck and does not follow your instructions for removal, then you should administer treatments in the circuit of the saddle as recommended, and properly care for the area that has been made healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the saddle is already being held in place in the body of the bone, and it is resisting the feeling, then you should inquire about that obstacle, and if you feel it, then aim at that obstacle with the tools that are most convenient for the reduction of the hernia.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot reach it due to the constraint of the plague and its length, and there are no nerves or veins here, then you should focus on the plague as soon as it is amplified and it is possible to remove the saddle.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If the saddle is held by the skin that is tight, then you should remove the fat in the part where it is held, and focus on that, if you cannot remove the fat from the fracture of the hernia and from those that are being held back.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you are performing the extraction of the tumor in any location where it is, you should use your own twist with forceps to all parts that pass through that obese; and subtly as subtlety as possible that the tumor is not cut and that it is true to your difficult attraction of it and of that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that about that of your time, you should lay down for a few days until the parts that are in the circuit of the body are moistened, and then repeat that which you have done.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If there is any opposition to the flow of the sinew, you should administer that which has been said about the cure in the capital city.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer aid in all your hands to the escape of the tumor; and do what is easiest and most tranquil, with time and strength as you have commanded.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And when you make the tumor contract so that the thigh is second to the figure that follows the one that requires the fatigue of the tumor in it, which is less favorable.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	If the incisions were made on the opposite side of another part, or if any other procedure was already performed on that part, or if there is doubt about the extraction of the suture due to the sensitivity of that part, then carefully examine it; and make the incision according to the quantity in which they grasp the forceps; and then attract that part, so that it becomes slightly edematous.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held on the bone, then you must stretch your hand according to the opposite direction as the suture presses on the bone, and extend it as much as possible, and then extract that part.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And so continue to hold that part for several days, and repeat the procedure as needed.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the end of the suture is in that part, then you must gently push it away.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the end of the suture is cut and you need to administer stimulation, then gently insert that part, if it is dark, stretch it so that it fits inside the concavity of the suture and then push it away from the suture.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the abdomen is concave, then you should press on that side with a strong instrument entering deeply into it, so that the abdomen rises for that side.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the abdomen is intoxicated, then you should cover that part of the flesh where the wound is, as much as possible, and apply a remedy to it that is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the abdomen is enlarged, or in the chest, or in the bladder, or on the back, and it is near you that you can touch that part, and it is possible to press on it, then you should press on that part and keep an eye on the veins or nerves coming out of it, remove it and place it under pressure until it is healed, and cure it after it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps used to hold the abdomen:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of them are like the teeth of a saw, which are sharp when we hold onto the abdomen to prevent it from being cut.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And those are special movements, large, few and small, according to the quantity of the size of the abdomen and the narrowness of the wound, and the width of the incision, and the constraint of the body.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	This sentence is a bit challenging due to the use of medical terminology and the structure. Here's a possible translation: "Form of expelling the pain from this extremity's cavity as if it were a needle for relieving the pain caused by the intrusion of the hernia into the intestine, and the force of that darkness:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The first line of the text is not in English but in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	This line can be translated as: "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and push it gently towards that side.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and leg, there are three veins; one of those is the one that is away from the curvature of the wild deer's thigh; the second is the sciatic vein, its location is away from the thigh of the domestic deer; and in the thigh, there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The first source sentence translates to: "The congestion of the veins that are most affected by the gallstones is known as gouty arthritis, migraines, and headaches.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of drawing those is second to what I recommend to you: it should be thin at the head of the thigh, and thin at the head of the thigh in the occipital region in the location of the veins that are ample and have good friction; then tighten the thigh with your hand in one point where the bones and the hips appear, and the areas of their thighs so that the knees and the thighs are in two points of the head of the thigh; and if you want that, and if you feel the fingers of those at the said point, here try it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Do you hold the scalpel, and that is what hits, and do you introduce that point into the vein through which the bone goes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And raise your hand and the vein and the codon to the parts that are divided, and insert the vein into the incision that was made earlier.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And is the length of the incision the quantity of two adjustments or around that; and make sure of the sutures as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten the powders and leave it within which is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	When the arteries of the lower limbs are affected, the ancient and unpleasant method of lithotomy is often performed on the female genitalia, which is a procedure that involves making incisions on the uterus. This procedure is frequently used to remove superfluous and excessive discharges from the vagina.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of the lithotomy procedure is such that you recommend it to me: secure the patient's thighs so that you can easily feel the arteries as they appear, and demonstrate their presence by touching them with your thumb; and then proceed with the operation.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the clamp over the vein at the points indicated by the method you have used, and insert the lithotomy instrument into the vagina, and lift the vein on it; and insert it at the same point as the other veins; and make sure to run the scissors second, according to the amount of your requirement.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then remove the clamp from the thigh, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and place your thumb on the cotton and pulverize it, and stretch that part which is firmly constrained, and lay it aside once it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	When the preceding remembrance has been given, and that which follows, and the attraction at the beginning of the free course.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	When the wisdom of veinotomy on the forehead is applied to the veinotomy of the frontal bone in ancient facial maladies such as migraines, roughness, and ulcers, it is considered appropriate.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the veinotomy is such that you recommend it to me; therefore, this malady strains the body and appears as if the vein is entering; and I should hold the instrument that is called the fossor, which is the form of this:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point eminently on that which is at the end of the fossor over the vein and press or push it with your hand, and leave it to run according to the quantity you want; and afterwards, remove the wound of the malady and strain it within when it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some wounds are opened at the end of veinotomy, but it is not necessary that the veinotomy be sharp as the others, rather it should be of medium length, and the veinotomy is then perpendicular to the transverse, where the bones are placed and the knife is sharp in it, the veinotomy when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	When the improvement of the two veins that are the tear ducts of two hives due to scabies in the hives and the maladies of the face, it is necessary to treat them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the incision is that it stretches the abdomen and is one inch long, and you should stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And if the incision is made according to the transverse and longitudinal plane, a few centimeters apart, and if the incision is subtle, then the end of the patient's finger is cut off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And as the pain runs along the bone as much as it is necessary, and stop over those points, and stretch them with a noose, and remove them from those points.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	When the incisions of the vein of the nose are conferred to acute fever and violent soda, and to the maladies of the face and emigranea and rogor that occur in the face, and especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the incision of the nose is that it stretches the abdomen and takes the nose on the left side of the patient's head, and holds the incisions subtle long and places them in the right location of the nasal bone according to the rectitude, where the vein does not appear at the sensation here, and where the pain begins to flow so much.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	When you finally cut the last of your wounds and let them run along the line of your need, and apply it with a new one, that one will be restored to its former state.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	When the benefit of the gynecological operation of the fallopian tubes guides to the congestion of the uterus and the beginning of leprosy, as well as the maladies of the limbs, the corrosive ulcers, and the impetigo, it is said to be herpetic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the fallopian tube operation is that the uterus becomes tense in each part of the hip; and the artificer is placed on the top of the uterus, and the uterus is set on a pillow.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And the fallopian tube is cut close to the uterus, little by little, and then an estimated amount or another one according to the need that is required; and it seems like another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And the uterus is loosened and tightens the veins in the uterus, causing stricture migra according to what the uterus is not focused, and it goes into the matter where the plague is cured.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The benefit of the fallopian tube operation on the veins is that it reduces small apothecary shops and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and maladies, and ulcers and fissures, and ulcers in the nose and in the circuit of the body.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the circumcision of those is that it heals the thigh from where you have cut it, and strengthens the waist of the man with a bow, and then rotates the lips of the man and looks at the two veins from which one is of the right lip and the other of the left; and the demonstration of each is by the black of any nail, and that is less in the circuit of those small black veins; and then insert each with an insertion.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you doubt further, and do not know which one it is, then understand the main point of that one, and the clear sign of that one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And give the appearance of the veins that are in the lips of those.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to insert fewer veins that are in the lip of that one.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	It is customary to insert fewer veins that are in the tongue of that one, which is placed at the front of the head, at the malady of the uvula, and at the maladies of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of fleubotomizing those is that it follows the malady between the tongues of the most important ones, and raises the tongue of you, and looks further at the tongue, of one vein of the lingua and another vein of the lingua, and the color of each one is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then fleubotomize each one; and keep you that you do not last the tongue of you in fleubotomizing those, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the veins in your groin have been cut, which is common in all men, and when the vein has been cut, it is done with two needles, or one can use a needle with a blunt tip or one that is slightly curved; or one can use a scalpel, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This anatomy is that which should be cut and those special parts of the body, according to the size of the veins and according to the strictness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	2. it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	3. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This is a small-scale incision with a subtle ending, and it resembles a vein slit that contains subtle citrus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	When the benefit of the common vein dissection of the basilar vein is considered, which is one of three veins: it extracts the source of the diseases that cause pain in the chest and abdomen, and from this it prevents the pain in the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is convenient for the surgeon, when dissecting the vein, to be careful and not be overwhelmed by fear, as if there is an artery there, and if he errs and adjusts the puncture of the dissection, it will injure that artery and cause a flow of blood, so that he does not dissect too much in the vein.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilar vein is not visible, you should believe that you have dissected it and that you have moved to the other side, or that you surround some ramus that you do not know; or that you dissect in the end of the arm, where it is manifest, and cut it off as the surgeons have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want to dissect the metatarsus, you should believe that you have tightened the elbow that touches the location where the location of the fingers is, and place it over the one you need; and cut the arm and make the vein concave by the dissection made by the fleubotomy as the surgeons have said, and keep in mind that the percussion covers the space of the artery location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see that the limb is tense, inflammation occurs in the place you have seen, and that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, therefore it swells.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you see that the wound flows like silver in a child's circumcision, and the wound is subtle, you know that it is from the artery; and if you cut and stop the mentioned thread on that long space, and then take away the mentioned thread, and if the wound is abscessed, four points are abscessed, then you stretch the arm and let go of that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the wound of the toe, and be afraid of it and do not worry about that for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the wound is not abscessed, and sometimes you do not have access to medical care for that long, then you puncture the artery if you see it; and if the extremity of it is contracted, and it is abscessed from the wound; or if you take cold water from a fist, and apply it to that, and hold one hand over the location of the vein that is strictured in the limb and the pulmones for another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the wound separates, it is good; otherwise, you should care for that gout of which the previous exudation was from the location of the powders that were previously separated from the wound.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	When the location of the sac of the patient is difficult to access due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of moving the arm, it is necessary to make a small incision.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	May's of the dark vein, fleebotomy is said to be the best way to extract the sin of the subterranean part of the head and to the part of the chest further down; therefore, it is composed of ram from the basilica and ram from the cephalic, as they have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	When the anesthesia is applied to the area that is feared in the anesthesia of the patient, four out of five times it is a nerve; and if it adjusts in the puncture of the anesthesia and paralyzes the nerve, it will cause the patient's stupor, and it is difficult to treat the patient, and very few are cured completely. And this nerve moves with the feeling; and if it is hidden in certain people and is subtle and not shown, you cover that you pause the anesthesia at the point where you anesthetize for the cut of the flesh, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, you must find the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of the anesthesia of the cranial vein is that it relieves the headache and consoles the maladies of the temples.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And if you want the anesthesia to act on the flesh or the limbs, four out of five times it is the pus that saves all the veins, and not the artery or the nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	This sentence is about the necessity of performing a tarsal osteotomy and the steps to do so. Here's the translation:
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	When, however, it is found that the patient does not respond to the first blow of the cautery, it is not uncommon for the patient to require further treatment.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the incision made by that cautery and the accidents that may occur in its performance, for which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first point to consider is that a fleebotomy should only be performed in a state of health conservation and with the hope of the patient's recovery, and that an unsuccessful fleebotomy may be caused by cutting into one of the veins in the thigh, such as the cephalic, fuscus, or basilic vein; and that an unsuccessful fleebotomy should be performed at the beginning of the day, before dinner, and in the winter, when there are signs of repletion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And if it is found that an unsuccessful fleebotomy has been performed, then three hours have passed since the beginning of the day or the first push.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more successful the fleebotomy, the more convenient and necessary it is to perform it at any time of day or night.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	When a woman has not been operated on for more than twelve years, and she is pregnant, it is not recommended to operate her before the fourth month, and the children who have passed through life without being operated on are not affected by it.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if any woman wants to be operated on for any reason, it is recommended that the intestines be closed before the operation, so that the veins do not release excessive blood during the operation of the bowels, which are pure and do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And the pregnant do not have fleebotomy of the naucient safe and clean, nor escape from malnutrition or abscess if it is not maintained in its state before the operation, nor ebretat, and mays that fleebotomy is feared colic pain and vomit, and aprop multiplicacio of coyt and of work and of exercise of dinner or watch and of all causes that dissolveys vertut, or sia corpore28 or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is worth considering in detail the nature of the humors that cause this, whether they are large, thin and weak, or if there are remedies that can be given to this at all.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if you do not allow it to enter the bath, or if it is made more flexible by some exercise for this, the intestine will become more subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the incision of the day, it is now the time for the third hour, as they have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And tell me what that part of the body has been guarded against in all animal accidents up to this day, as well as anxiety, rage, fear, and all corporal accidents, as well as labor and superfluous pain and semblance like theirs.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in its own seat, the causes are present in the use of the quality that is customary among men and is aromatic and odorous and is balm and semblance as the following quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the surgeon on a cushion that is placed either on that which has been incised or on the one that is about to be incised.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And if you remove the upper arm, and cut that part with your hand, and then stretch the limb with the belt and involve that cut part with the belt.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	When the stricture is treated, whether it is the stricture that does not allow for passage, or the stricture that is superfluous, you forbid the flow of the sac; or it is for mollification, and you forbid the body of the sac to become excessive.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if the stricture is true, it is that which causes the body to be cut and torn between them, entering when the veins are inflamed, and are declared in the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if the knife is true, it is that which cuts and tears the body in a very small part of ancient oil; and then stops the indication of the blade over that vein, where the fleshotomy was to be made, so that the vein might escape a little, and the percussion would be set aside as much as possible of the veins which are full of wind and when you place the fleshotomy over that one, it is the fleshotomy that is tightened; and the fleshotomy does not strangle the vein, and if it does, it is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, in order for this knife to be stopped and to be present in all of these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is swollen, or the thigh is inflamed, you should massage it once or twice a day, and do not apply pressure, for fear of causing an abscess, nor should you put it in a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And if the patient likes it, repeat the laparotomy.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the abscess is small and comes out subtly, and you fear that it will not close the amount you want, then repeat the laparotomy in the same direction as before, adjusting the incision in the abscess a little, and do not worry if the location becomes swollen again, because in men's cases, a small opening is needed.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If the abscess has already opened, do not repeat the laparotomy, because there is no cause for it; and stop on that particular part of the gutting knife blade, because the heart of the sanctified one will be relieved.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this case to use gutting knife than oil and the others.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that the gutting knife is well maintained throughout the laparotomy in which the veins are closed, and you must prohibit the heart of the sanctified one from being opened again, and say "stop" when passing over any of those parts, because the heart becomes subtle and twists when it becomes large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If in the location of the laparotomy, a great aphotic reaction occurs, four watched spots appear, and most importantly for that which has not been bled but only that vein, and if you cut, and place your hand over the site, and let it infuse with water and salt, a few scalded spots, and tense it for an hour, then it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that with this to the end of the time of the sanctification of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If Roman is in the location for several days any black or greenish, do not see that; and if you wish, place your hand over that cause of aloen and dissolution, or any cause of watery sweat or of wool or linen or like to that.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And four watched spots appear, and you must have a laparotomy of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over that, and if you press, and your compression over that, that eminence is evil and bad; and then keep you that you have placed your hand over that some cause of water that they have said, four feet the blood will flow from the sanctified artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When gout is applied, by reason that the place is endurant, and accordingly care must be taken of it by the other physician when he comes to heal it.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	I know that according to the amount of one's virtue and according to the color, the physician is superior to every man in turn.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the physician is black, you enter when it is red; and it seems that if you see it is large, you enter when it is subtle; and it seems that if it is sharp, when it is left the sharpness of it.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And know that when it is large and strong and needs extraction of the physician in a vein, the fleebotomy of the vein is enlarged and the fleebotomy is lateral.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is thin, make the opposite of that, and know that it is extracted in several veins, and the thread is straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the better that is administered in the fleebotomy of the vein is that it is the transverse section, not the puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This section of the surgical procedure is saved from the flow of sin and the injury of nerves, and is praised and saved as a successful fleebotomy at that latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And it is customary to find sinciput wounds after a fleebotomy, and you should cure that denant the fleebotomy with a little drop of milk or simple oximel; and extract from the sanc in three veins or four.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is inflammation of the complexion, you should take from the fleebotomy a drop of milk or a drop of aromatic honey or an aromatic honey such as cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones like nutmeg, cloves, and other spices, or an aromatic honey with a pleasant odor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if there are sinciput wounds after the fleebotomy, and it is caused by the sanc's intensity, you should cure that with a drop of blood from the flesh and an aromatic essence; and use aromatics in some way, and it will help the pain.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When other causes have been mentioned in the division of the head of the sacrum for evacuation, use those.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	When the hand becomes engorged and the pulse is weakened, it indicates that the surgery for varicose veins is proceeding well, and the patient's vitality is improving, as the affected area is gradually evacuated, one drop at a time, as the quantity of vitality increases in the following days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	When the hand becomes engorged and the pulse is weakened, and the heart beats strongly, it is necessary to reduce the amount of salt in the second view, and the coronary artery becomes stronger, which lasts for approximately two hours or nine days after the first varicose vein surgery.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	When the pulse in the coronary artery is reversed from the direction it should be, and this occurs on the second day or third day, it indicates that there has been an adverse reaction to the surgery.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When the coronary artery is found to be already hard and sharp, and there is fever, and the pulse is weak in one view, and the pulse is greatly increased in another view, and the perfusion is amplified as it occurs, you will have preserved all the conditions of varicose vein surgery; and you must place your hand over the coronary artery to prevent it from bleeding out, as it may die instead of sinus, and four more views should be taken when the varicose vein surgeon is negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you want to slide the arm and evacuate the second vein view, as the surgical opening of the vein is already closed and the wound is difficult to heal, then press subtly with that force and gently bend the extended arm, as this is too much.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	If the fleurdelys is entered second; or if you are sharp with the fleurdelys that coagulates in the wound of the vein; or if you pause over that of tyrian aloe, or of sage, and compress that a little within which the sanc is outside and out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is stitched, press that and do not touch it within which the suture is sedated.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to you to evacuate the sanc secondarily and not excuse it, then press that on that place or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "thigh band" is fleurdelysed in the place of the dark or the basilica, when it is not atrophied or aggravated, as it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the lumbar puncture of the patient is that it introduces its hand into the dark cavity that follows where the vein appears obviously.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	When you apply strength over that particular painful area and then make a small incision following the transverse line, not horizontally or along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	If the incision is wide and your fleebotomy is the one you use to make the cut over the joint of the leg, a small.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of urine is prohibited, then you should place your hand on the bladder and let the urine run into the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the days of summer, then you would be excused from the repetition of placing your hand on the bladder and the time would pause the flow of urine into the water during the night.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the fleebotomy of this vein is saved because of all the other veins, quarter of it you do not have pulsating, nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the fleebotomy of the small intestine is referred to the maladies of the stool.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the fleebotomy is that you strengthen the vein or your hand, because you have placed it on the bladder, as if the vein were inflamed and was demonstrated at the same time; and then make a small incision following the transverse line; and if they are not closed in re, then no need to repeat.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	When preserving the joint, do not cut the skin too much, for it is the nerves that are located under the bare bones that cause pain.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And apply the cautery in the tail of the snake and let it run along the spine, for if you do not apply it in the tail of the snake, the cauterization will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the cauterization is extracted according to the amount of necessity, place your hand over the vein or artery, so that it does not become firmly consolidated; and it seems that you will do this in all cases.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The advantage of the joint surgery on the left side of the patient's thigh is that it is similar to the maladies of the flesh.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do it in the joint surgery as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the vein section in the joint surgery is that it is similar to the maladies of the part where the vena sephee is located, as those maladies are similar to the ones in the breast, and to the retencio of mestruas, and to the ulceracios of the thighs and antiquities of changes, and to their semblantz of the maladies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the fleubotomy of the patient is that it enters the desired part of the body through an incision and covers that area where the veins are visible; and it is applied to the joint of the foot with a point; and the location of the vein appears at the tip of the toe, and from there it branches into the face of the foot with small ramps.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	When making an incision for a boil, the blade should be held horizontally or at an angle, and the addition of the salve is better and the pus will come out.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you make the incision on the sole of the foot, be careful not to cut any nerves that are near it, and stop the incision at the point where you want to insert it, as if you were inserting it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And make sure the incisions are vertical.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If the stitching of the wound is prohibited, then you should irrigate the foot with water and let the sand run through that hole which has been emptied.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the scalpel cuts into the first layer of skin, you should irrigate the incision with water and then stop the scalpel on a small part of the wound, where the salve is; and do not fear the surgeon, only be careful not to cut any nerves as they have been told.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	If the other foot has a similar problem with tightness.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	For the sciatic nerve, the location is as they have said, you must leave the cavity of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	When the operation of the gallbladder is done by the doctor for pain in the foot,
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the gallbladder operation is that it enters into the belly, and quickly and firmly presses on the side of the foot of the broad latch within four ditches under a long thin needle, which does not appear except for this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	When it appears, you perform the gallbladder operation on that second side of the joint that is possible for you and the second transverse, and it is better; or if it is done through inscision or by section, the location of the foot is salved.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And this is done in some men and women; and if it goes too far, and does not appear in the feeling of everything, you perform the gallbladder operation on any part of the foot, and that which appears in the two of the foot enves the ear and the ring.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And keep an eye on the nerves, and make the surgeon run the quantity you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And cut out the stricture and hold over the location of the gallbladder operation, which is salved by stretching the location.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	The first line of the text is a bit unclear without additional context, but it seems to be discussing the causes and effects of "ventozacio" (which could be a misspell
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	of ventzos or of thorns or of eyes. It's possible that this line is discussing the sources of pain or discomfort. The next line seems to be a continuation of this idea:
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventzos is caused by one or more of these: one is a surgical incision and extraction of pus, and the other is ventzos itself." This line suggests that there are different methods for treating or causing ventzos, including surgery and the use of pus.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventzos that is caused by a surgical incision is one of those causes, whether it is from fire or the fire." This line seems to be discussing the cause of the ventzos in more detail. It could be that the author is suggesting that the ventzos is caused by either fire or the heat associated with fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the ventzos that are administered by surgical incision and extraction of pus are twelve locations of the body, of which the one where the ventzos are located in the body is connected to the neck; and the other location is the collarbone; and ventzos of the chin from the mandible to the mouth; and ventzos of spatulas; and ventzos of incisors, and so on the tip of the tongue; and ventzos of two candles, and so of two brushes; and ventzos of two cavities; and ventzos of two holes." This line seems to be listing various locations in the body where ventzos can occur, as well as the causes of those ventzos. It's possible that the author is discussing different types of surgery or medical procedures that can cause or treat ventzos.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	The first source sentence translates to: "Bloodletting does not extract the poison unless it is taken from the thin-walled veins in the flesh, and therefore does not cure those wounds; nor does it matter if bloodletting is done on one's own or on another person's wound in any other part of the body for repletion when the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If wind rheum is caused by laziness or continuity, maintain the remedy throughout the entire month at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the place where it is located and at any time it may be.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that of men who, when they are in pain and need to have something extracted from them by means of vinegar, it turns out to be very serious and painful; and of those who experience pain and weakness in their face and head, and neck; and of those who feel pain and weakness in their face and forehead, and darkness and slowness in their limbs; and of those whose location is changed for the vinegar; and of those who have multiple risings; and of those who experience multiple throat pains, or tongue problems, and vomiting of sweat; and of those who sleep and it becomes more painful, and of those who wake up with pain, and with other causes of pain in their appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when you have given it in any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then you command vinegar to be made as hot as possible, which has passed two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	A good thing about vinegar for the nose is that when it reaches the head and causes gravity in the face, and then it falls into the limbs, it is most important to have proper elimination of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This wind is in the location of frontal lobotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	When it is not necessary to use that which is of complex nature, or in that which is catarrh, for that gives great harm to that.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it does not matter if one uses those needles, and in the heads of those who have badly behaved fleas.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Much rather is to that which is continuously over it, and therefore it is necessary that you command the windbag to pause his hand for a little while at the sides of the wounds, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Much less ventilation of alkemistry is in place of veinotomy of the black and basilica vein: and therefore it confers on the asma, and on the constraint of the ale and the scissura of the sturment of ale, and to the throat, and to the replecio.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the windbag of alkemistry be a little put out, for if it is paused, it will generate weakness in the heart and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the windbag of alkemistry confers on the accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, and emigrance, and prefocacio, and pain in the gums of the teeth; and it is in place of veinotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the windbag to not press on his own arm but instead use a scraping to prevent the artery from entering and avoiding bile flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	A windbag is placed on the chin, which relieves alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gingiva, and appearance like those of the diseases that are in the mouth, and stands in place for fleebotomy of alphatic that is in the labial lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Moreover, the windbag that is made over the lips with spatulas relieves caphatan, which is made for the replenishment of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the windbag that divides the teeth of the flames partakes in the juvament of the fleebotomy of three veins, which are of the basilica, dark and cephalic, where at that time the arteries of all those veins were held by hands that were in the flesh, and those veins that were thin were inserted when they passed through the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the windbag that does not proceed in scraping, which the place is denuded of flesh, and place the nerve and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	This is a challenging line due to the unique phrasing and vocabulary used in medieval medical texts. Here's a possible translation:
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you command the wind to blow with a great breeze, and that it be of earth, then the location will indicate a need for a deep cut; and so the fine winds should be sharpened in the process of sharpening.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Many winds of the changing seasons manifest, which run through the entire body, and comfort the old pains of the knives and the testicles, and the vesica; and provoke menstruation, and comfort both the uterus and the ovaries; and stand in place for fleshing out of doas sophenas, and alahorcoben, and doas cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, the disease affects the entire body and makes it difficult to write in one's own hand.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the winds of menstruation, the joy is directed to the joy of the winds of the changing seasons.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that they pause the wind at the beginning of the view and suck it through tempered air, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but rather pause those sounds, and return them to their place, and that the humors go to the location by unexpected encounter.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	When you scrape and repeat the small piece little by little, and consider in the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has flesh of rare parts, know that you cut it once and do not push, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the wind to enlarge the cut and spread a little, and make the success easier.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If in the sanctuary it grows, know that you cut several times, and in the first one, open the way of subtlety to the sanctuary and the aquosity of the patient.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Less in the second by the examination of the acquired water of the extraction of the large sanctuary.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the sanctuary is very fetid, know that you make a deep cut in the last piece of flesh so that you can achieve the excretion.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract the sanctuary little by little or a small part, one cut is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract more sanctuaries, make a superficial cut; and if we know that the sanctuary is large, know that you cut deeply by deep cut.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	When the term of "scarification" is used, it refers to the depth of the abdomen, which is done solely for that purpose.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the type of abdomen is thick, hard, dark, and the wounds are straight, then it is believed that the locations of the intestines are more lenient, more open, and more resolvent; if it is during summer, use olive oil, oil of violas, or oil of apricots, or oil of cream of cocoa; and if it is during winter, use narcissus oil, oil of lilies, oil of chamomile, or oil of saffron, and in that manner.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is large, greasy, use oil that is dark, such as olive oil, or balsam oil, or almond oil, or anise oil, and in that manner.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the windbag is of large parts with fleshy skin, it is believed that oil is prohibited for this, and it is recommended that the locations of the windbags be washed with water that is clear or clear water from solatrum, or clear water from coja, or clear water from bordolaguas, and in that manner.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	When that of which the sanctification is gout, washes his or her vents with water that is warm or cold and pleasant to the touch, or with any other substance that is agreeable to it.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	When those that are superfluous are gouty, washes his or her vents with water that is hot or cold and harsh, or with any other substance that is agreeable to it, such as sand, or decoccio of anet, or camamilla, and it seems to them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is important that the washing of the vents be done with warm water; having some that are administered immediately after the bath for an hour or more, and having some that sleep with the washing of the vents.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is to be done in order that the washing of the vents should be done before phlebotomy?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	And if you consider the beginning: if the one who is washing or who will do phlebotomy has a hot temperament and the sacred part of the patient is red and inflamed, then you should take cold causes, such as milgranas acetosas, and endivia, and e secanabin, and julep, and it seems to them.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When the patient's movements cease and their breathing becomes shallow, and their limbs become thin and pale, it seems that they are approaching death.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that which causes the collection to become thin, it is believed that it takes in air and water, or semen and sweat, and some odor is emitted between the body and the nose; and that it is commanded to use little beer and food, and stop the movements of the patient's limbs, cannabis, and piss and small amounts of sweat and colchicum.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is believed that on the day of vomiting and diarrhea, the beer is greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is believed that it is given in beer for some hours to Tyrian wine or musk, or musky ointment, or by the vomiting or diarrhea, so that the main limbs are comfortable and the wound is sublated; and it does not matter if they take that scald.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	More ventilation is needed for the patient's scarification than for the ventilation that was previously paused on their face, over the heel, and over the elbow, on the locus of the jowl, and the picatry of the neck, where these members do not suffer scarification.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	When joint pain is not wanted for the sake of male members, but rather for the purpose of relieving the pain in the testicles during ejaculation; and they use that which is dissolved in the urine of the man, whereupon they place it on the belly and the navel; then they apply it to the joint and rub it in until the pain subsides.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it has been placed on the elbows when they are swollen or inflamed, then for the sake of virtue and to remove the inflammation from that place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly when it has been placed on the knee and the testicles, where the pain is contained in those enclosed parts.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventosas are administered with such goodness, and some are administered with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some ventosas are administered full of water in the testicles of the membrane.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is why the ventosa is full and is pushed out, it is water alone or water in which herbs have been added according to what is convenient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The first source sentence translates to: "The shape of the vent is maintained by two flaps, as we have formed them; and the quantity of the preon is the greatest of a palm; and it is in the lower part of the body, in the location where it is in the circuit, the quantity of the body, the through is small second to the quantity that enters into it a hole.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	When the pain is caused by cold humors, such as rog or citron, of large margins, lion, engorged and tense, so that it does not lead the member out of its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if it is at the end of the transverse course of the thigh, where a candle is placed over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this ventilation is much greater than that which has been recommended; and the few men who have used it have reported various diseases and the state of that person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventilations of the infants are different from those of the young and large-bodied ones.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this ventilation over the member is that it extends the fire of the wood gently with a few candles of wax, and places it on the end of the transverse course in the location of the ventilation, so that the fire is lit around the end so that the body of the thigh does not burn.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And if it is placed over the thigh member, and it is said that it is over the track that has been said, then when you have the ventilations and do not indicate that they have said and that it is necessary to have the track and that the vapor is on that track, then the ventilation will be too dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	When the physician follows the method according to his own will, and proceeds as directed.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	When the wound in the male member is caused by the lack of water in the private parts, and there is no transverse or through wound, and it is not treated except that it is filled with water, and it is placed over the member just like that.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this wind, the more it grows, the better it is, because it can receive a great amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capital.cxxxvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood clots are not administered in the male member except in the members where it is impossible to place a vent, due to their smallness, like the teeth and gum; or in a naked member, like the nose and there it resembles.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that if you have found blood clots that are in the waters of worldly exudation.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And they should be washed the day and the night with water that is in the private parts, and that does not cause any disease in the belly of those; and their stomach should be emptied at the beginning of the surgery and venting; and their member of the male member should be washed when it becomes slimy; and they should be placed over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When they are full and there is no more room.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	If it is possible to make a cut in the area that is exposed to the wind, it is easier to heal.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Otherwise, wash the area with clean water and apply a cool solution; it will relieve and soothe.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the course of the vein is prolonged and there is hardening of the blood vessels, and it does not subside, then you should put a wet cloth on the affected area and hold it in place until the subsidence is complete.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the vein is multiplied, you should powder vitriol on the affected area or similar substances as those of scabies, until it ruptures; or they are placed over the area and held in place until the feces adhere to the location, and they are laid down within the sanc abscidit.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And finally, if necessary, repetition of blood vessels, when possible, change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If the blood vessels are prohibited from being suspended, wash the area with the recent vein or leave a needle in the locations where it is possible to access the vein; and place them under pressure when any sanc starts to ache.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want them to sweat, sprinkle a little of the following on those: aloe vera, salt, or charcoal, and blow as much as possible.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Now begins the third part of this treatise: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is vital in the art of medicine; and it deals with the restoration of fractures and accidental displacements of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, understand that this chapter is full of the follies and vanities of humors and those who, over time, do not pay attention to the freedoms of the Ancients nor read from that letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this collection of the sciences of our land is private; and you do not have it obligated to you at that time of all; and I have not admitted that later, except by long study of the freedoms of the Ancients and knowledge of understanding of those, and from when I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And you direct your experiments and studies in the long course of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And you have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and the experiments I have made thereof; and I say that I am now open to you and free of occupation with extension; and I am open in the end of extension; and it shows in the end of declaration; and I form in this ways of the substances that I administer in that, as is done by addition of declaration, so as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	The first line of the text is "Capitol primier,
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	This sentence seems to be discussing the interpretation of certain teachings or principles, possibly in the context of medicine or philosophy. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	I say that when you occur a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, you should cover that you sit at the beginning of amputation or elevation of that, or else if no cause is prohibited, it is as follows, whether it is that which occurred suddenly, or grows in decrepitude, or it is time for vehement heat, or vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let your diet consist of green herbs and meats of hares and rabbits and squirrels; and prohibit fatty meats and large amounts of food and all food that fills the veins of the heart, if you are sure of not having anaphylaxis cautery, and if you do not fear excessive matter flow to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the thigh to its original position as it is customary for that one.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone begins to be restored, you should cover that your thigh is not nourished by nutritive foods of protein and fat and greasy in which your food consists of milk, eggs, cheese, liver, lungs, and hearts of cows, and fresh fruits, and vegetables, and grapes, and large amounts of these, and this regimen makes coagulation of fracture with leather and honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You know that bones become porous when they are in men and in the first violence and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated after their nature by the drying of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	When the parts are solidified and continue to dry over time due to the dryness of those members, and they continue to become more solid as they approach the end of their flexibility, just like the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and clings to the cut ends of all parts due to some cause that resembles glue, which grows thicker and more rigid as it is consolidated and glued together, within the limits of its strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, within the limits of the cause, does not prohibit any of its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the thighs, thighs in which gravity and viscosity and heaviness are found, just as they have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Different types of fractures depend on the part of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fractures are different depending on the part of the body, and a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the head; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the shoulder; and in fact, all other parts are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	When I recall all the types of fractures, I will explain them in the distinct capital of the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There are different types of fractures in their own way.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are different types of bone fractures in their own way; some are curved or angular, and others are determined by the length of the bone: and so are the fractures of the ribs and sternum and clavicle, and some are closed and some are open, as it is written when preparing to write, and it is a fracture that is crushed and disrupted in the head, and it is a fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And all types are engaged or tortured in the restoration of the bone according to what was remembered in the distinct location.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many types of bone fractures.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this is known bone fracture: it is the tortuosity of the bone, and of that prominence and its appearance to the touch, and so of when I comprehend that with my hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	When the site does not appear to be tortuous and there is no pain when touching the bone and the thigh does not suffer great pain, then do not break the skin.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	There may be a twist or a small fissure, but it is not necessary to use the entire hand as you would on your own hand; there may be a pause over that part of the medications of which you remember at that moment in that location; and there may be a straight path for stricture.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	You know that location when it is arched and not divided into two or another, so that nothing happens in its part of the comparison, as you are remade the whole part of the hour for correction of those that happen to asthma caut.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if asthma caut happens to you, then lay it aside for a few days until the asthma ceases; and take the second following manire that you can lift and push.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You know that restoration of you and the wound is made with a different one that of the bone in which it happened to have asthma.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then tighten that second that comes after the memory of you.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If in the bone there are wounds, then you need an extension of this member cut into two parts, if it is the leg or the foot; or if the member is small, or a cord or a cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	If your position is at the place where you pause the member's leg according to its natural figure, while the parts of the member that are extended are perforated, then you will find that those addicts return to their original positions and in each hand that can reach there.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And keep in mind that you should not touch the patient's thigh with your own hand or injury; and perforate laterally through the bone of one side to another companion according to better forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And at that time, if you can touch your hand to the patient's thigh and if sometimes there is another cause, correct that and extend it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And as for extensibility and compression, it is better to make words that the surgeons who have seen watched contribute to the posture of cautery according to their operation, or contribute contraction in the member as they have seen before in the operation of their watched motas.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And as for annexing, adjusting, and proper operation and stricture of that member, and relieving and tranquility; lay the patient down on that and see the swelling that does not cause that in the hour of his vigils and of sleeping, and watch its revolution and agitation, and you must its evacuation, and you must all the movements of your entire virtue; and wait until the position of the member is a position at which the pain caused by it is secured when it is in the disposition of the position of the member or injury; then you should change that to another disposition of that which does not feel pain; and keep in mind that the position of that one should be dry and engaged, so that the member does not become twisted when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	When the quality of the stricture of the quiet member is that which you recommend, because you know that different members are cut in their appearance and size and form according to their kind.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	When those who are small in stature, like the arms and elbows, and resemble them, it is necessary to cover the envelope with a thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	When those who are the largest and most robust have difficulty with the thigh or the chest, it is covered with cloth that is soft and hard, where the lip connects the member large and strengthens that part of the stricture engulfing it, there are those who do not have any blemish.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then start your evacuation of equilibrium, place the limb conveniently there, over the location of that fracture am three or four layers around that member; and hold the limb with a small part of the limb.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then take away from that at the end of the surgical wound of the location of the fracture, and hold tight those members that do not touch your stricture at the place where you have strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then make the envelope of the location of the fracture a little larger, and soften the stricture piece by piece, when you take out a big part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap the other end over the location turned inside out about the envelope, and see the envelopes at the end of the fracture; and your operation is in the stricture of the envelope and in the softening of that which they have said in the first envelope.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the wings of the lion or cloak that is of the kind where the tortuosity of the fracture lies, if in it the tortuosity lies; and otherwise, do not pause at all for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause on the other bandage, and then cover the areas with these well-made splints as much as possible, if in the place there is no inflammation or post-operative pain, and you pause on the one that seats the post-operative pain that also reduces inflammation; and leave it for a while; and you should hold the splints firmly.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if the splints of the joint of the cane are well-made, and formed in an intelligent way; or are made of flax; or of ramps of palm; and the size of each splint is according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is necessary that the bandage placed on that fracture is thick and has a small one on the others, and the length of the splint according to what is suitable for the member in magnitude and thickness; and then hold the splints with another bandage according to your first stricture; and then tighten the bandages as much as possible according to what has been said about the stricture, and it is that your stricture according to the location of the fracture is more rigid when the fracture is longer, and the more it is stretched from the fracture, the tighter the stricture becomes.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The first source sentence translates to: "And if the threads are large and subtle, and many in number; and if the threads are large, then as you have seen in the operation of other folls pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, and it is a great error when the stricture is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	When it comes to the matter of filing secret documents, it is not suitable for you to use stringent measures, as you will not be able to recognize them, and there will be a mistake in every step.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the thigh is affected by the ends of the sticks that cause rigidity in the areas, then you should pause there for a while, either with a stopa of leon or lana carmenada, as this will not cause any harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some wounds are full of pain, and there is disruption in the column, and you will find it in memory in that capital second singular.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that the whole member is not straight on the first day; this causes the member to be large, and it is not necessary to place your hand over the stela for more than seven or ten days, according to your security against the occurrence of gout.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plasters that the ancients used to restore, which were placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The method of the plaster used for restoring fractures is convenient for complex movements and especially for women and children, where there is no heat or friction: and it is that you take from powdered wheat, and it is the mullion of the grain that you must make the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	When the patient is lying down, unless they are in pain, and if you want to touch their private parts, then gently touch them with your hand. And use that hand for that purpose.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another hand for fractures and dislocations: a recipe of assafetida, of ladanum, of acacia, of unguent, and migra, which is made from milk of witch hazel, of all parts of the drac tree. x; of oil and aloe from the drac tree. v; aloe from the drac tree. xx; all parts of the thighs and elbows and knees and fingers and toes and the back of the head and neck, if the entire body is scalded; and use this ointment, which has a good composition and restores broken bones gently, and cures most wounds.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another hand for fractures and dislocations: a recipe of migrach and a white aloe from the drac tree. x; of oil and of aloe from the drac tree. v; of acacia from the drac tree. vi; of balsamic arsenic from the drac tree. xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	This is a complex medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	When the joints and bones are separated from their original positions, and pain occurs in those areas and fissures and fractures: It should be bound with a clean cloth and dipped in vinegar and oil, and it should be placed over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, in this ointment there is no benefit for restoration, for cure of scars and expulsion of pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another ointment that restores the cut: Use fresh leaves of fig and poppy salvation leaves; mix them all together and make an ointment from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A plaster that promotes the restoration of bone fracture and when you want to resolve the scar of the wound: recipe consists of aloe vera, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of ers, all parts, and; all parts should be cut and tied with a string, if the member does not swell.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	However, if it swells, you can soothe it with cold water of colander humid or wet and use this.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	This appears to be a description of a first aid or medical treatment for an injury or condition called "apostema," which might refer to a type of skin irritation or infection. The recipe involves applying a mixture of ointment, semen (likely referring to the seminal fluid of an animal), and other herbs such as balsam, magnolia, violet flowers, and chamomile. The mixture is applied to the affected area, and the patient's hands are placed over the area to help with healing.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	When Yopocras says that there is nothing better than having something solid on the member that needs to be restored, and that it can be made of wax and olive oil, or no other cause; and recommends that it be a mixture of both greatness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	In the town of Gualia, it was observed that they were placed over the member that was cut off in order to restore it and its causes, which are caused by lack of heat due to cold, as well as resemblance to those causes that have been recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	This appears to be a recipe for a plaster or ointment to soothe injuries and alleviate pain. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	When the second quantity follows the one that covers the limb and is dislocated, it is because you consider that if there is no pain, no excitement, or the bone is not broken, then it is not a matter of this place, and you should not cut any more joints.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you happen to reach the location of severe pain or excitement, then cut that one in that moment and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take some oil and wet seaweed, and immerse that in warm water, and let that lave the location where the excitement and pain cease; and then remove the dressing from the member for an hour; and place a piece of wet linen over the wet seaweed immersed in vinegar and oil, and put it back on the member after you are sure there is no cautery, and to reduce the inflammation of the member, and to relieve the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And repeat that stricture subtly and plaster it with small pieces of plaster and not strain it too much for your first injury, and subtly it will be cured.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If at times the gallstone and the inflammation and the pain and the swelling are all the same as before, and you instruct for plastering and stricture, then do as you have done at the beginning of the opening of the gallbladder.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If nothing happens to the member from any of those causes that have been said, then do not remove it for less than three days or four or seven; and some are completely healed in twenty days after your departure, according to what has been said, as long as the fracture adheres, and when it is placed over the coagulation of the flesh on that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And you tighten in the stricture as much as in your first stricture, and you reduce in the swelling of the patient's thighs, according to what is preceded by the remorse of the.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If at times the place of the fracture has dried up and become less than what is necessary, you should know that this food is prohibited to reach there; and then give that water to drink all the time that you see it there; and in three days, alleviate the stricture a little, and for this operation, give nutrition to the member, and he will be cured.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When restoring the fragments of a fractured limb that was not initially set at the time of the injury, following the reduction, and if it is further reduced according to its tortuosity, the error in the operation of these is great, and there is great fear, and if it is truly restored, the ankles will become larger in later freedom and will ache for him or her.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is reasonable that this does not work.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Secondly, of fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The kinds of fractures are blows, and their figures are various, and their causes are distinct. Four types of fractures one is caused by the force of impact on the chest, the impact stops all the bones from entering the cage, which leaves the bones behind as they do in a fracture of the thigh, and for this type of fracture it is called complete reduction; or the chest penetrates one part of the bone, penetrates the flesh of the bone and does not pass through the penetration to the end of the bone; and this type of fracture is called dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	When the plague of these bone fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contracted or displaced; and it causes the pain to be perceived as heat or burning on the skin, and it appears to them.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture or is penetrating that has been previously approached by the panniculus which leaves the bones; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these bone fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	E of fracture is that it is healed in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this special capillary fracture is not named.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	E is fracture that is made or by burning or by pressure on the skin, which enters any layer of the bone in the parts of the digits, and it is made in the concave location as accidies of the bones when accidies are made to them by percussion and it is separated from them into the parts of the digits.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	E especially it is made here in the bodies of human bones, as those which are like the caps of the infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	When it comes to all of these types of fractures, they are considered as separate cases.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find relief in treating all of this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you would identify all of these types of fractures by detection over them and by inquiry into their attempts and the decayed flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special capillary is identified by what is discovered over the bones, and it is removed, and it is placed on the attempt, where the fracture appears dark.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture, the beginning of the accidents of the thigh is considered, and if you see per accidents that signify by their significance over the body, such as vomiting of color, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscission of vote, and sincopi, and acute fever, and edema of the nails and weakness of those, and appearance like those in major dispositions, its cure is not done.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see accidents that are not current, you hope for health, then start the treatment of the one.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is what brings the disease to you in the beginning, as it does in the days of winter, and then it is in the bones of the foot that you study on the fourteenth day of the month, according to the position of the moon.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you should sit on the bone according to the seventh day, knowing that afterwards the bone will become corrupted by panniculitis, and that accidents will happen that have been reported.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated the panniculus covering the brain, and it is divided into small parts and torn, then you should close the infected and torn part according to what you are advised by me.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And is that you raise the head of the diseased part, and uncover the bones according to custom, and then follow them according to your ability according to the figure of the disease, and that it be lowered over the diseased part.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you have difficulty detecting the bone, there are fluctuations in the sinus or apoplexy, then you should apply this as advised by me, and it is that you put on the location of infused drapes in vinegar and oil, and then close the plague within which the apoplexy is sedated, and you are sure of the flow of the sinus; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in the ablation of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The second manieyra is that you insert the bones into the holes, and this is the form of it: And then administer another bone into it, a small plug that corresponds to that one; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the corresponding bones.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you need to use several types of pins, of which some have small plugs that are different from others; and among them some have large plugs that are similar to the others and are at the ends of the extremities of the limbs, and they are either made of iron or lead.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily by tapping on the pins to avoid hurting the head and leading to the other one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are hard and firm, you need to drill into the circuit of it before administering the pins, which are called non-penetrating travels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And it is not named anything except for four of them, which do not stop at the end of the bone as this one does, because for four of them the travel has a rounded extremity or margin over that which is left of the cap of the hard stone, similar to a small margin or circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take a large number of those which you consider to be at the tip of each bone, entering if it is present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is sharp, the quantity in length and breadth is second to the quantity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of travels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the cut bone is that you place the travel over the bone and revolve it there as soon as you know that the bone has been penetrated; and properly move the travel to another location, and pause there until it passes through the entire quantity of the size of the ring or envelops it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	When you approach the joint, insert your thumb and make a small incision there, so that you can see below, as they have said, either by erroring the bone, or by your own hand, or by some other cause for these sturments which will appear at that joint, like tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful not to touch any cause of the cipher with the scissor.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	When you have passed the bone through the cipher, and it separates from the sturment if continued, and you extract it, be careful not to damage the other sturments in the hardness of the bone that is in the os, but rather make sure that the pus and subtle pus are as small as the other incisions.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you find any part of the small and sharp bones, take advantage of that to treat the sturments; and then care for the wound of the liver and discover those which have been said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other hand of operation is longer, requiring more patience, as Guillaume says and praises it greatly; and this is the saying: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is shown with a vehement and manifest pus, when you have discovered that part and placed your hand further on the end of this slow and gentle scissor, which is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	When the lenticular part is alone and does not include any cause, and the acute part is in two layers in length, as many times; that the lenticular part should be adjusted to the cipher of the face of the acute part in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And if you cut through the incisors of a tooth, it is easier to turn them around, and you should be sure that the panettone does not occur in the accident you fear in any hand, and if the doctor 14 was the rule for all men and their ignorance of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If Romania has any cause annexed to the bone of the panettone at certain locations of bones, it will inscribe that of you at the extremity of the incisor of that lenticular part, and deliberate that of you at the ease, which is deliberated from your pain and your worry.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panettone, and that is separated or remains in the bone, and the face of it is rough and subtle wrinkles, you should cover that asperity and erradicate those subtle wrinkles with razor blades of various quantities so that you can administer them in all locations to the convenientpus of those and the correct pus of those subsequently when you lose your operation that cut bone and the figure of him.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	When you begin to administer the medicine in your own way, use the qualities of those drugs that were first mentioned at the beginning, and apply a small amount of the drug's substance to the pus, and do not stop until you have finished administering the medicine to all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the small fractures and subtle breaks, if you have made mistakes in correction, then follow this order to make amends.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And that is why it is not applied to all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And remember that we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus is torn when you radicate the bone, then remember that you take hold of a piece of it according to the amount of blood, and immerse it in warm olive oil, and place it over the orifice of the blood; and take another doubled or tripled piece and immerse it in wine and olive oil and place it over the first piece and make aloe on the pus that you can make on that, not pressing too hard on the panniculus; and administer it to that line, and do not strain it only by the amount of blood.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	You must pay attention to your virtue that is causing the plague in your care; and do not be in its ignorance of encounter nor another; nor should you add virulence to it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, corrupt that and dry it up, and spread over the mischief properly that malicious evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And spread over the temple of the head, as it is being monitored by the bone and especially when the care of the head is being removed, and darkens in its surface; and then consider that if it spreads to the mischief, you know that all these accidents are made up.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not darken but from the medicine that is paused there, and it is due to the virtue of that medicine that caused that darkness, you should know that you hold in your hand one part and three parts of oil of rose, and apply those lines over the temple; and care for that with the specifics of the cure that are appropriate when it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish,
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	When one of the parts of the body is twisted, you should know that you are inserting the small instrument into the nose, and that you are opening the fracture above the second indicated point, and below the third indicated point, and then you return the nose to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this is done for your ease, and be careful not to damage that part of the operation on the patient's thighs.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nasal partition, and it does not reach the end of the ray, you should know that it is equal at the extremity of the ray where it is small.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in multiple parts, you should make it appear like that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And counsel you on the restoration of the part in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and otherwise, know that you should apply the second or third dose of the cautery to repair the aperture.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a machine of drapes at the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or put dozens of cushions, if the fracture is in multiple parts, and use as many as necessary to fill the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	When the ancient restorers found that the calves were wrapped in bandages and moved throughout the day, I did not see this; having a cover that the meat is wrapped in album of huor comfit as powder of moli; and then lay the qualgua inside when the bone is fixed and the cartillage is endurazida.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some have been found inside the nose, in place of the calf, penis that is wrapped in cloth of leon; and it is that you have fractured the nose with great force and that the throat is not prohibited for inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do it, and if you wish, make qualguas.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if you encounter another pustule cauterized, apply the nose with carrot or cork enfused in vinegar or sea water, or with dayquill.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not encounter pustules cauterized, then cover that you apply the defora with flour and powder of enses cofitz, and place over the leon's stopa, and do not let the nose have any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are slightly fractured or injured, then cut over those, and extract those using instruments that are suitable for them; and afterwards close the wound, and care for that with what is appropriate for it, and apply plasters to it that are convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you encounter an infection in the nose, then cut that wound and care for it with what is appropriate for it, and administer injections of antibiotic solution into it if necessary to cure it completely.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 24.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the jaw when it is disfigured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not infected, look carefully to see if the fracture is deformed only, and not cut in two and curved at its edges, then your diagnosis is lighter.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And then, if the fracture is in the right side of the jaw, then insert the left indicator in the mouth of the patient's left cheek; and similarly, if the fracture is in the right side of the mandible, then insert the left indicator from the other side of the patient's mandible; and push that grip on the fracture wound to facilitate its division into parts, and the other part of the bone, and make it even with the other.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the fracture of the lower jaw has already been divided into pieces, you should cover the fact that you are applying extension to the pieces in a straight line, as soon as it is possible to achieve equilibrium.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you experience an upheaval of teeth at disruption, strengthen those which you suspect are made of gold or silver or lead; and place a cushion over the cut jawbone, and place your hand over the double drape, and place a ball gently on the lower part of the jaw, or a pessary according to the length of the jaw that you have prepared for the application, within which it should not be destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and stop eating the foods that cause stomach ulcers.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you think that the figure has changed in any way, you should cut and dig into it on the third day; and then correct what has been altered and apply some powder of bread, albumen of egg, or flour of wheat, which you have left on the jawbone, and place your hand over the dressing leopard.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when you have annexed and adjusted that plaster to the jawbone, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, if it does not heal within three weeks; four more treatments for this fracture are expected in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another accident occurs after the incision, the doctor should administer this that has been said about the wound in the bed of the patient when they are cured, and keep that wound open.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is in a bad position, you should consider if it is the separated bone or the callus, and you should carefully determine which of those calls is closest to that of the patient in the removal of those from the bones.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound opening is straight, you should enlarge it according to the quantity of your need by the fleuronomy.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have those calluses and they are not in pain, you should open the wound if it is wide; and if not, stop on one of those that are closest to that and cover it with something that covers it and is comfortable for that patient when it is cured.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the shoulder when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The wound that has been said to be in the shoulder is broken by the muscle, and this fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When a bone is broken, it is either torn, separated, or separated into two parts, another that does not cause any damage to the surrounding tissues; and it is considered for the restoration of the bone; or it is clear that the fracture occurred in this bone, and it is difficult to restore the bone; or it is clear that the fracture is infected.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is infected, is that you must be present with two assistants, so that one holds the adjutori and follows the broken end, and the other extends the collar to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And roughly close the fracture as soon as it is known that it is in the form of the next part that comes after it, and not in it being prominent or concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need extension, know that you pause behind the thigh bone using a drap or cloth, and the size of the extensor is according to the amount of your need; extend and raise the collar and pull the spere through the hole that you close over the fracture as it approaches.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot strike the end of the triceps to the defective parts, by which it is perceived to be flattened on the preon, then cover that the thigh is pressed down upon its cervix, and place your hand over the muscle of the thigh a larger coyssis.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The minister presses the muscle of the thigh over the parts inside until the bone of the triceps is raised above the preon in its place, and you should correct the fracture and anchor it with those as the ties say.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel swelling of the triceps and pain, cover that you cut over there and remove those swellings for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is held in the bone, you should make an incision of the triceps as one of the scissors you have previously used, pushing that you had placed further down the thigh the sturment that serves the cipher; and this is the form of the sturment:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It resembles the belly of the one you have just used, and its latitude is according to that which you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the fragility of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the body should be second to your ability in the operation; there should be two ends with as many times as possible, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the plague that you have inscribed when you extracted the sediment from the bone is wide, and it is certain to cause inflammation, then you should adjust the edges of the plague with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disruption is small, or you fear inflammation, then you should fill the plague with cloths and powders according to the amount of the plague's division.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If inflammation occurs, then inform the wound with cloths dipped in vinegar and oil, and stop over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the stricture of the bone when it has plague and sections, is that you stop with a plaster made of flour from the album of honey, and stop over the leopard's stop, and return the suture to its original position, if you are asked for that, and return humates, so is long that the Sarrazis, which is far from the palm or around it; and return powders double on the stop and the plaster; and hold a subtle tabletop of the quality of whose latitude is three fingers and in longitude similarly; and envelop that in cloths and envelop that with the table on the location of the fracture; and return humates as it is, and revolves that over the col of the bone and both ends of the titillate of the thigh and the titillate of the buttock, and reduce it over all parts, and when sometimes the stricture of the fracture is in the stricture descent, and it is known that it is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And so, do not be alarmed by the swelling of the bone; and for this reason, whenever you see the patient every day, if the joint is softened or the swelling has already subsided, then you should correct this and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then, stop the patient from sleeping on their chest, and also stop the cradling of their arms, so that they can sleep on their side with a small pillow; for this reason, if the assistant of their arm is elevated by the collar of that, and thus the fracture of the shoulder is raised by the muscle; or if the arms of the patient are laid down at the neck of that.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not touch the joint if it does not happen in the right place or hernia, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And if you have seen the face of the patient with swelling, then apply the plaster and adjust it to the stricture and restore that and wait until it is restored and the fracture of the shoulder is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it becomes stronger and more comfortable after twenty-eight days, and some are observed in the bodies of men who have been there for that time.
Capitol .vi.	Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is custom
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	itally called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the area is opened — and it is opened in the middle of the area — and it is not known except by touch, then you should follow that the figure of the fractured bone is placed under the preparation of the arm and reduced to that figure natural in the entire length of the bone.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. And then place a powder of double-distilled water; and then place a cloth on the surface of the table, according to the amount of the spatula either too much or less.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Then if the surface of the table is concave in the depressions of the spatula points, then you should place the concavity on the edge of the bone, and it may be possible to adjust the surface according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then, with firmness, apply cold humors that are not excessively thick and are flexible enough to be fitted within the joint without causing discomfort to the surrounding area.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the limb in every day; and all watched that is softened, another watched and stretch the limb if it causes discomfort to the surrounding area.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient's leg on the firm bed.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, you dissolve the limb, and you know for certain that this is not of the bones from which the beginning was not uncertain nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the small bone and wipe off the chain, you will find that it is divided, and remove it, and follow what has been said in the fracture of the clavicle of sadacio de apostema caut if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When an accident occurs in the patient when the thigh bone is broken, it inclines towards the parts of the fingers and toes, and causes great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, and severe vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the cut bone and not hidden from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the leg is that it should be placed face down on the patient's back, and a cushion should be placed between the thighs of a cushion; and properly adjust the muscles of the leg, and adjust the costals of the leg to the most of two costae, and gently guide you in the operation of the leg and the equilibrium of the whole hand that can be possible and that suits for this, until when the figure of the bone is returned to the one that was before.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	When you pause over the plaster and stop, and pause over the table's subtle surface of soap or cloth and of those that seem to rise, push that away with your hand; and subtly place it on the cut bone that is not rotten; and go around the neck of some watches, and tighten that restriction evenly; and consider the watch throughout, and when it becomes soft, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to provoke dissolution of that corrosive or pruritic, painful, or apothem that may occur in that place, then you cut and remove that and erase the plaster and correct what occurs per your manicure for the curative hand; and reduce the plaster, if sometimes it is to the face; and adjust that restriction as it becomes healthy.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of the ribs when they are twisted.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a rib fracture does not occur except in large locations that the two sides touch; and from the ends of them, it does not happen to those contractions but only because of those that are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	When I know that the patient is not afraid of the sensation of being questioned by the doctor,
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration should be as follows as to compress the fracture with the hands according to the second possible way, if it is possible to compress it in front of the joint, and then plaster and tighten the cut bone on the table, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is declining towards the dental parts, you will experience severe pain in the back and puncture, as if puncturing that which has been torn, and for this reason to stretch the belly; and you will encounter difficulty in hollowing, and coughing, and vomiting of bile; and this is difficult to heal.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the antidotes were already invented in that time which were effective.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they say: if you press the feet of the abdomen that generates inflammation and effusion, so that the belly is distended and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the deformed parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We would have known this for that reason that it was not the cause of generating anaphylaxis if it had not happened; and if it has already happened, you can help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they were advised by their doctors that the wind should be stopped and instead, something stronger should be used; and it seems like a reasoning, but in fact, it is feared that the wind will attract excessive cold to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they were advised by their doctors: cover that place with wax that has already been submerged in olive oil, and they should be placed between the back bones as soon as it is filled, which is the liver when it comes out again in that second contraction; and it should be treated with the thighs with the treatment of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the thighs cause severe constriction that does not suffer, and they puncture the membrane with a puncture needle, there is fear over the thigh, they cover the place with wax, discover the torn costa, and then take out the instrument that preserves the cipher, the rememoration of which is preceded, and they extract the bones easily, and remove it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And if they adjust the lips of the plague, if it is large, with sauce, and they treat it with that within which it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you happen to have an attack of gout, then cut off the affected toe and fill the wound with moistened powder and cover it with a clean cloth, and let the foot be treated as such that it comes away from the gout attack.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	If the person is hung over the table on which they sleep, then it is cured.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of a spinal fracture in the second thoracic vertebra and the first lumbar vertebra.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some fractures of the bones in the lumbar region are visible, and they seem to be near the second thoracic vertebrae, and similarly to the second thoracic vertebrae.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when you happen to have an attack of gout and want to know if it is cured or not, consider that if the joints are already softened and stupefied and dead, and cannot be extended or stretched, and when you press on them with your fingers or punch them with a needle and do not feel any pain, then you know that it is not cured, and in the months of disposition it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If one wishes to make points on those and sense in those constraints, you should know that the nucha of the bone is safe and that the thigh rarely undergoes cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see the spines of the back and wish to know if they are healthy or not, consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that it has become soft, consider those that are affected in the most, and if you place your hand on the patient's shoulder, you will feel vomiting and diarrhea, and some women have been seen to sit over the patient's shoulder and urinate but cannot, you should know that it is fatal and should not be cured.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If you do not find any cause for those, the cause is better and can be treated with something else.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The cure of the patient is that you pierce at the seat of the aposteme caut that you place over the spine that is red or has mugols, and some women have been seen to sit over there when the aposteme caut is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And you stop on one of the comforting and enduring plasters and press on that with your hand; and order to the patient to use fresh ones and maintain tranquility and not sleep on the affected part where the pain occurs until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if an accident occurs, you must treat the fracture of the bone or any other cause that has already been separated from it. You cover the wound on the back and keep that bone; and adjust the edges of the plague, if necessary; and care for that am alcu encarnatiu of the enguentz, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the bone of the thigh is broken and the end of the coitus, you must cover that the other side of the finger in the anus, and close the broken bone with the other hand, if possible, with another side; and press over the plaster and stick, if ordered by those, and hold that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel the bone broken in it, you must touch that, and take it out, and care for the wound on the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	The translation of "Capitol .x." is not provided in
De restauracio de la ancha.	1. "De restauracio de la ancha" translates to "Of the widespread rest
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	1. "Les osses de las anchas tart so trencts" translates to "The bones of the thighs are broken and if they break, the fracture of them is not simply a communication at the extremities of those and they are inserted in the longitud and declination at the parts of the dentaries; and they cause pain in the foot and puncture, and the cushion is stunned when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	When the restoration of the patient is needed, you should extend your body over that part which is above the fracture, as shown in the figure of the patient.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is at the end of the limb, you should cut through that second bone that appears to be in alignment with the patient's natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long bone or declines to the sides, you should place the cushion over the patient's abdomen, prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have cut through that bone, pause over the plaster, and place your hand on that patch of lead or cotton, and press firmly on the stricture of which you are not afraid of puncturing a fracture or moving the staple.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And cut through the concavity as much as you can that holds the bone in place that presses the stricture second equal to, and command the patient to lie on their side or turn over their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an accident occurs with the cautery, you should stop extending your body and the patient's restoration until the accident is settled, and place your hand on that second one that follows; and then return to the restoration of the patient and press that part as firmly as possible.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you happen to injure your skull or bones, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol, xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of restoring the fracture of the adductor muscle.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adductor muscle is that which is between the thigh and enters into the shoulder of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is torn, the restoration of the muscle is done in one of two hands, of which the one you hold is the one that you press lightly with your fingers according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 They are attached to two ends of the wire, and it is hung up from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the thigh over a seize; and let go of the hand that is torn, which comes out at the top of the leg where it is annexed to the curve of the fist.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend it over that cause, or the master extends it to the parts behind; and the cauterant and the fracture are in the same position, according to which the fracture returns according to what is covered.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The first source sentence translates to: "The other hand is that the thigh be placed on the side of the neck and suspend the chest of the patient; and accordingly command two ministers, one of whom holds that the fracture is above the patient's shoulders, and the other holds the head further away; and thus extend to their respective parts.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	The second source sentence translates to: "And if you want the extension to be strong, then hold on to the fracture of the limb and the other limb, and thus extend to their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	The third source sentence translates to: "And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then hold that the tension of the limb be placed on the tendon and the other further away from the fracture, the cord.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	The fourth source sentence translates to: "And if the fracture is near the cord, then hold that the tension of the limb be placed on that location and on the cord.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	The fifth source sentence translates to: "And loosen that part and work on it, and as soon as it is loosened, cover it with what has been covered and apply it in a good way, hold it there if it does not cause a cautery.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs after cauterization, it is necessary to relax the stricture within the seventh day, and place something over the red part that appears in the area where the abscess was, and continue to stretch it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The forceps used to stretch it is placed over the fracture, and then an envelope of cloth is wrapped around it; and adjusts the arm over that assistant, and places his hand over the affected muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And remove the cloth and stretch it over the assistant's arm to make sure the arm is in its proper place, unless there is any cause for the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place the splint over the fracture at that point where it is pressed and pushed by other splints; and leave a space between each splint of the same length as the fracture, and the length of the splints is added by three fingers' width.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And stretch it over the splints at the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the capital.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	When your stricture is over the location of the fracture, it should be straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the along is along the fracture, the stricture is smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	If you sometimes notice the situation of the screws and the stricture as they have said at the time when you restore the member to its natural position, then you should do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear anaphylaxis cauterization, then you should remove the stricture and the screws into the day after as they have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And after three days, consider the liament in all parts so that it does not cause inflammation or swelling at the site; or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to the superfluous stricture; and then correct everything as they have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are over confident that nothing happens to this cause, then do not delay the ligament for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And is the patient's bed on the side of the leg, and the legs are above the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the full cloth of the gauze, and consider in total at the night or day that the figure of the cut member is not delayed or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, then correct everything as your virtue allows.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the meal of the patient according to the order that has been given, as it is necessary to make the meal subtle at the beginning so that it becomes tighter when it starts to stretch; and you should cover the meal of the patient.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four customs of the assistant and the bed of the patient are that they are tightened in 40 days; and you should cover that they are loose, and that the food is administered and the medicine is given to those who correct the same.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is open, you should not take out the wire and staples within days or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of restoration of shoulder fracture.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The shoulder is composed of two bones, which are called the clavicles; of which one is small and the other that points to the ear, and the other is large and the one that is located behind the first.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger clavicle is cut only slightly, or the smaller one, and they are often bent in three places.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small focus is cut off, you restore the function of the organ, and the cure of the organ is placed in it.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the focus of the organ is cut off, there is a fracture of the organ, and the cure of the organ is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And it is bad when those are cut off of the bones that are supposed to be.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	If the small bone that is cut off is the focus, it is necessary for the surgeon to intervene, and you should restore the function of the organ, which is slightly enlarged, to make it easier to enter if it is fractured.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the large bone is cut off, you should cover that with a wide piece of cloth.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are cut off, you should cover that with a strong bandage.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you should cover the figure of the mother with the restoration of the organ and the extension of the wound over a cushion, and the hands of the mother should be in the parts that are described, put as much as possible, and the mouth should be covered with a pillow, and the throat should be on a flat surface.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	If a cushion is placed under the patient's thighs or chest, to prevent the hurt from becoming worse.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the surgeon extends the arms of the affected side away from the body, and another surgeon extends them in a similar manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the mason encloses the bones that have been removed, putting the best figure together that can be.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the process of the bone it is found to be cracked, then you must cut through all of it in that place to save your honor.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If in the separated crack it is found that the codon is broken and not in your expectations for the restoration of it, then you must take care of it and leave that side with the hand that has been told to do so.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is not in the head, and I have already made this singular capital, then take the care of that one.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If at the beginning of your restoration you encounter an apothem, then you must line a cloth with a certain type of olive oil and white wax, and be more precise between certainty and subtlety, and press the cloth over that to hold the apothem in place; and then remove the cloth and put on a plaster made of powdered clay from the earth, and then put stones; and that stone should be the one that is placed over the crack that is wide and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You already know that the name of the shoulder bone is found in the major dispositions, or it could be a fracture in one or two ribs.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then pause your traction at the location of the fracture with great force and intensity, and when less than half a minute has passed since the fracture or the lower parts of the fracture, pause the traction for a short moment after remembering to breathe at the beginning of the head.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The sheets that envelop the fracture are soft sheets, not hard or rough, and the one that is most suitable for it is the one that is most appropriate between subtle and large, as has been recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member and its limit to the proper days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if you happen to encounter any cause for which rectification is necessary, please pay attention to the cause that affects the member and immediately bind the member with wet gauze as soon as that impulse ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And make sure the member does not constrict while it pauses and then return the traction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the contraction has become softened and the bone has been re-strengthened and appears similar to those, then you should adjust everything according to your own virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	If you consider that the nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to superfluity of stricture, then know that those who cover it with things that make it soft, do so for a few days until it runs into that nutrient, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If at the thigh there is no cause for those that have said, then those who cover it do not know if it is sliding within the next twenty days or outside of them.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the thigh under the patient's body with its natural movement, and let him sleep on his side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Do you know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or more accurately in xxviii days, and then the position of the joints and the positions of the virtues are followed.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter thirteen.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the thumb of the hand and of the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that the thumb and the fingers of the hand are fragile and do not break unless they have seen visible movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When one encounters a leg fracture or dislocation, you must cover the thigh with a blanket and make it lie in a straight line, and then hold the leg down on that extended part.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And the surgeon extends the bones and places them in good position, making sure that they are well aligned.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And you must cover the wound with plaster and stopper it, if there is no risk of gangrene; and then hold the wound in place according to its size, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the fingers of the hand, and you make it look like a hope of cloth, and command the patient to hold the hand with the fractured finger stretched, then make sure that the cloth is long enough.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the wound is covered with cloth that is long enough to be lifted, so that the cloth is applied to the hand; and hold it in place according to its size.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the joints of the fingers, you must cover the wound and place another one on the palm so that the hand is open and straight; and then hold the stricture, as it is rolled around the nail between the fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you meet a fracture of any of the bones in the hand, then if it is possible to set the bone, do so with great care and strength on the palm and where it hurts, and stop for a moment with a small twist so that the fracture is elevated and not painful.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other bones, such as the thumb, big toe, ear, or ring finger, then you should set it with great care and strength on the point where it was before, or continue in the same way, which is better; or stop over that small point, as they have said in the pit.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and accordingly to that, the disposition of the cautery and opposing force — as in the previous operation — I think that it covers when any cause of those occurs, following the narrative of the wound.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of a bone fracture of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh that are visible are cut and declared to be in the position second to the part from which they came and the swollen part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the part is made in such a way that one ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament is tightened after the fracture, and the thigh is prostrated over the patient's stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the surgeon extends all the ligaments to their full length according to the quality of the bone in the location of the fracture.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is proper for the purpose of the joint, then the ligament should be pulled towards the neck of the penis, so that the extension causes it to extend, and the other ligament is tightened over the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the stitching is proper for the neck, then the ligament should be pulled towards the neck and the extension should be made to the parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the surgeon should engage the bones as much as possible within the joints but reduce them according to the similarity and the bone is united by good union; then apply plaster and stricture if it does not cause harm to the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If harm occurs in the member, then remove it as soon as possible and bring it to the doctor's care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	When the stricture of his side pain is: cover that wraps around the fracture a hard needle, bend it twice or three times, and remain in the superfluity; and then wrap the bandage around what comes to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long needle between the thigh and the bandage of the denol at the parts behind, and let the ends of the needle come out through the pores of the parts, and then roll over the bandage and the thigh as much as there is superfluity from the needle.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place your hand over the thigh at the location of that astelhas fracture, and place one stone over the bones of the bandage.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And make the spaces between the bandage and the thigh as thin as possible, so that the tightening is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And begin the stricture of the thigh over the location of the fracture with three or four folds, and as few as possible, your stricture will be smaller and press less and more.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	When extending the ends of the umbilical cord to the parts that come inside the cavity of the foot, and tightening the ends of the other parts so that the limb does not remain in the wrong place, it is necessary to do this.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And apply the structure over that, so that it does not happen to the corrosive or post-stroke caustic or inflammation and similar things; and if something happens to any of those causes, then cut me a piece from there, and correct what has happened completely, according to what has been said in the motion.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is pain from the bone that is placed, then you know that this second one is possible for you; otherwise, cover that with something and rest it, and care for that which precedes the remembrance when it is healthy.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And if some guides are tightening this fracture of the thigh or another thing that is adjusted to the other limbs, as has been said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the patient, it does not happen that the cauda is injured by claudication; and if it is restored alone or another one that has been applied to the other camba, then you must be careful that the cauda of the one that is hottest does not cause pain.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the thigh is tense for forty days or a few months, and this depends entirely on the variety of the complexion and the other positions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone of the elbow.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that a fracture of the collarbone of the elbow rarely happens without visible injury to the movements.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If there is an injury to the fracture, it is not a fissure or a cut in its parts, and this causes pain or discomfort, and over that everything is affected by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of the fracture is such that it is held together as much as possible, being broken in its parts according to what can be adjusted and made easy, and easy to make.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply plaster and place it over that part; and tighten as much as is convenient for that.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the positions that have been recommended for other fractures, and apply it as similarly to those as possible that opposed this accident to this, taking into account what is convenient for this being to be made whole within the time that is possible.
Capitol .xvi.	I apologize, but I am unable to provide a translation for the source
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	This line translates to "Treatment of the fracture of the thigh bone." In medieval medical terms, this likely refers to a specific
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	This line translates to "You know that in the thigh bone there are two bones of which one is large and the other is small, and they are named according to the name of the thigh bone; and the other is small and is called the hamstring." In medieval medical terms, this likely refers to the distinction between the femur (the larger bone) and the patella (the smaller bone in the thigh).
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	This line translates to "And it happens to the species of fracture that occurs in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, a treatment is made to the bone as the treatment of the arm fracture, and the operation of the bone is one." In medieval medical terms, this likely refers to the treatment of a compound or closed fracture in the arm, which involves reducing the fracture and immobilizing the bone with a splint or cast. The "operation" mentioned here may refer to the surgical procedure used to set the fracture if it is open or displaced.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	This line translates to "And if the three bones are compressed, the thigh bone is converted into all parts." In medieval medical terms, this likely refers to the process of fusing or uniting the bones of the thigh (femur)
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	This line translates to "And if the small bones are compressed, the thigh bone is converted into the parts of Denant." In medieval medical terms, this likely refers to the process of fusing or uniting the small bones of the thigh (
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the three bones of the big toe are compressed, it causes pain in that area, and is one of those causes that you are not familiar with.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and equality and limb movement according to that joint.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the joint is not having movements, then extension should be done more firmly and with less force, and it will be better for your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if there is any cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you engage the stones and that complexes the whole operation, then you should take handles of iron of such quality that they are placed at the ends of those causes which are placed at the ends of the joints, and so are very thin, and not have any pain in the hands, and be as long as those that are longer than the joint, and enter into the hole that is further away.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then cover over each drap in folds according to the length of it, and place one over the beginning of the joint of one part and the other part, and they are entered into the hole that is further away from the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And if you have the draps in three locations of drap ends and at the middle location, then this stretching of the joint is forbidden for clinical use on the right and left side, and it is for the good posture.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	When the longitudinal muscle of the thigh has been treated with a piece of iron, and it is placed in its cavity so that it can preserve its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is truly necessary to do this in a fracture, and when it is truly swollen.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider the thigh in every day and study it for the purpose of diagnosis, and you will guard against strain and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of those occurs, you will know that this is necessary to prevent injury.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and of the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not always suffer from fracture; fewer bones of the foot and toes suffer fractures, and the toes do not suffer fractures except for bruises in the cases of dislocation.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot are broken and sometimes those bones are raised above each other, you must place the patient on their side over the ground prepared as is usual.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	When you have stopped the foot on that which is raised from those bones, and cut those, and pull them out, and turn them inside out when they are in the wound.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply plaster and stop the wound, and put a small table on the abdomen of the foot with two pieces of plastic.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that to the foot as much as possible, push it down with cloth and other causes of which you indicated.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	After three or four days, you will loosen the limb, and if you find the bones pulled out, or they are crushed or dislocated, the operation on those will be successful with pins.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If the bones are crushed, you will restore them, and pull them out as you did in the restoration of those that you advised me to do in the restoration of the same.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then stop the crushed bone at the second part of the length of the same, and put a little piece of cloth on it; and put the foot on that table which I recommended to you, and tighten the bandage as much as possible.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	When the joints are compressed by two or three or more bones, then you should place your hand over each part of the body wrapped in a leather sheet, and hold the table at the base of the foot, and stay on one of the caps of the table for the stomach of the foot to hold it firmly.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes that have been said to you in other accidents of this kind; and stop here, as I have said to all accidents.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the hip bone and the shinbone of the leg.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is compressed, make that cut in that direction, and then lean it towards the end of the other side, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And if the midwife does not cut the thigh bone, and it is made in the thigh bone as she hopes; and if the woman is cut, then raise the feet of the little one by little, until all that is forgotten within which is outside the end of the thigh bone as she hopes and the hip bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on the back of the patient, and when you want to urinate, make it easier by facilitating the urethra and urinating, and reduce and return that second pillow to the hand that was at the beginning, and return the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And fast for seven days or until you recover, and then that will be restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take once a day a piece of cloth and press on the abdomen of the patient with a canula of glass; and enter the entire vesicle into the cavity of the abdomen, and inject air through the canula until the vesicle is inflated due to the cavity, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be closed with the urethra and stay for several days after that has been recommended, until it is cured.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the joints of the hip or thigh are swollen, administer in the restoration and wash with the water that has been recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is dry is not hidden in these proximate fractures and that little ends, especially to the one who studies and uses this free language; then that fracture means to you in the largest dispositions via dreyturiera in the restoration and in the stricture of the urethra, and therefore understand be.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When a man's beard becomes infected, take garlic from any place, and put it in that; and place a cloth over it in the dressing, and wrap it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	I apologize, but I cannot provide a translation without the specific source sentence
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	When treating fractures of bones that are inflamed.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to treat the one who has suffered the fracture, and especially if the bones are large such as those of the thigh or of the assistant, or seem like that, which you cut and bleed as much as necessary, depending on the conditions of bleeding in you or have been told.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the inflammation becomes severe, you should know that you cut yourself at the retention of the liquid that you pour over the affected part, if there is no other cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And so begins to restore the fracture in those days, and do not delay, if you do not suffer from apoplexy.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If you suffer from apoplexy, then you should continue the restoration of the fracture within nine days, after the apoplexy has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of that, until you have made the necessary corrections for other accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	When the hip bone sticks out over the spine and you cover it with your hands, you will realize that it is difficult to reduce and stretch it with little effort and length.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not at your preparation and the equilibrium of the limbs is not in your favor, you will reduce it with your hands; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight digits, and its latitude is according to the quantity of the fracture; and therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to hold these three or four according to the quantity indicated in the treatment throughout the specialty of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it is good, and it is less difficult for you to have less weight on that in the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it is sharp at the end that is marked in the limbs' ends; and the desus of the bone is large, and the tendency of the bone enters into parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "the winged victory," which is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	When the end of the bone is raised towards its end, it is called the extremity.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press that in a vein that returns the bone, and it should be engulfed by some accommodation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And try to engulf the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the bone is slightly cut, and not pull on that with good exception, you know that you have inserted the end of that bone inside that instrument has power for this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone of all that has been recommended, insert it in that way that pleases you from the cuts that have said; or shave that part with one of those razors in any razor you can.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And pay attention to that which Romans in the bones of roughness and sharp edges.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced and the pain in the abdomen becomes very intense, you know that the bone is not returned to its natural position; and then you should do this great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration is complete and you make the bone, and then submerge your hand in the black sterile dressing, and specifically if it is in summer, and do not sit on the public plague or any other cause that may be in it, so that you do not cause additional harm and corruptive decay.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And at the time of the final complement of the bone restoration, and discover the plague that has been identified as being present, which has been found in the area by those who use forceps and covers according to the amount of plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take all caution not to stress the plague at the fracture, as four motions have been seen and it is possible that gout will be called by the doctors, and do not cause additional harm to the dead or rotten parts of the body, which is unpleasant.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the second stricture is narrower, it is softer and different from the other fractures' strictures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the plague is large or the plague is bad, and you are afraid of those accidents that have been reported, and there is pain in that area, do not think that you are sitting on that, less force on that envelope of hard dressings in place of stones and press harder on it.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the plague has begun to appear for about one or two days, and there is already an abscess, then you should take off the clothing that was previously placed over that part, and apply poultices made from herbs that we commonly use to treat plagues, such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It seems to you that you should carefully remove the limb and consider the plague in every day and evening, after it has solidified and closed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the incision runs smoothly from one part to another with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague lasts for several days, and it has not solidified or the abscess has not separated from the abscess, then you should know that these are signs of small pox that you should be cautious about when treating the plague.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those signs to those that are separated but not extracted, and those that are not separated and cause the member to swell and cause pain, then it is possible for you to insert the second one.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you encounter the plague or dysentery, it is likely that another type of corruption and putrefaction has occurred, and you should take precautions by placing your hand on one of those parts that are recommended for the care of the disease that was previously described in the capital chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	When you have finished opening the space between your thighs and present your hands: when the member is swollen, place your hand on the member as if it were the thigh and the helper, and seeming like those of the large members, and do not presume to attract or extract, nor allow death to occur within that time or within 30 days or 33; and if you see any inflammation, treat it with care if it was seen by you, and if not.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of nodification that occurs in the healing of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Nodification occurs in the healing of this fracture in the course of the treatment of injury, and especially that it is caused by joints, and is excited by the figure of the member; and therefore the member is prohibited from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Consider whether the nodification is recent and is managed in those medicines that have stitched them as if they were alone, and eyes, and mouth, and anus, and semblance like those; and whether you take from any or all of them, and conceal those that are wet with stitch, or albuminous, or agape, and stop that over the nodification in a good way, and bind those around it.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	When the tightening is not released for those days; and then it is released and goes further, if it is not too much painful; or press over that layer of inflammation, four layers have property to relieve totally this that is swollen in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If inflammation has already been converted into stone and it is necessary to cause the star of that cavity, then you should cut that through the part of the stone that is most protruding, and insert the superfluous and eminent one, or ratz that enters if it is too much painful; and cure that within which is sick.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of fracture when it is restored and approaches the natural state of the member subtle and free not following the side nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of bones is restored, and approaches the natural state of the member subtle and free, then it is not made except by certain causes: of which one is a multitude of solutions of the ligament and of the gluing of that fissure not following what is said; or for superfluity of stricture of the ligaments within which nutrient does not run to the member; or for superfluous embrocation; or for movement superfluous at its time; or for lack of sanctification in the course of the malady and for deficiency of the.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The first source sentence translates to: The curative treatment for gout is to apply warmth to the affected area and make the patient lie down so that the swelling in that part of the body decreases; administer water; and apply poultices and compresses over the affected area.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	The second source sentence translates to: Then, place a poultice or compress over the affected member so that it attracts nourishment from the blood, or continues to cause irritation of the mucous membrane, in order for the nutrients to correlate and return to their natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitulare Bruno, also known as the Capitulum B
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Capitulare Bruno, also known as the Capitulum Bruno, provides instructions for treating damaged bones that have been restored and are forbidden from being operated on due to their condition.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you arrive at the member that has been restored and is undergoing treatment for tortuosity and eminence in the bone, and it is fed in the same way as the other limbs, but the member is not prohibited from natural operation, do not cover that the word of that member is of new trinity.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodulation are recent, it is believed that they are due to water accumulation in the area where the joints have become mollified, like those of an iron pig, and similar to willow bark; and it should be applied to the affected part as a plaster of mollificatio, just as good linseed oil is applied; or that it is a mixture of willow bark and gray ointment or olive oil of cinnamon, and it should be applied to that; or that it are greasy figs and are tied with gutta-percha threads and resemble those of some medicines that are used for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some women are dissolved by constant rubbing of the area that is wetter, and it is administered to move the member in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	When tortuosity has already been annexed and becomes hard and converted into stone and necessary for the care of the iron bone, one should cover the point with the cover and dissolve the continuity of the bone and make it inscribe as much as possible in the superfluous nodes of those metals that are cut subtly by the iron, and make the management of the patient's ease easy in that case.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capital, Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of a speech on displacement.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of the body, which prohibits movement and forces the figure of the member, and causes great pain and wounds on the thigh.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an injury occurs to the dislocation, one should pierce as much as possible and reduce it, and do not delay reducing it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiffened and difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And therefore, it is not necessary to cover the joint with something hard or stretched at the time of reducing, because sudden movements cause muscle spasms and painful sensations.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When something happens, it is necessary to know that you are located at the pubic symphysis of the patient, and that your hands are inside where the incision was made; and that the member is embrocated with warm ointment and olive oil, and that it is reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members are cured by this which will bring about the memory in their place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the reductions of displacement following which there is a fracture; from the point where the swelling begins to enter into the point where it ends.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of displacement of the mandible in front.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the mandibles are dislocated and do not tart; and the displacement of the teeth is caused by two causes: either they are relaxed from their places with little movement and are slightly mollified, or they are completely dislocated and moved, inside which they are mollified at the joint between the thighs and the saliva of the foot and they do not want to hold their mouth closed, and the tongue of him is wrapped in the pouch.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the displacement of the foot is slight, it usually returns to its original position for no apparent reason.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the displacement is complete and well-defined, you should immediately administer a reduction of the joint, and do not delay for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And is that the doctor holds the head of the pelvis, and inserts the finger between the teeth of one jaw but in the direction of the dislocation of the mandible, if the dislocation is of a single part; or that inserts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is of several parts, and the others say that the jaws are deformed because of which they engage; and commands the pelvis to stop its jaws and release those from any position; and the finger engages the mandible and ejects the mandible as it returns to the original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if the mandibles are found to be dislocated, you should administer an eyewash with water and oil, and immediately make a slight reduction of the jaws and do not delay the reduction of the jaws of the entire mandible, as they have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	When the patient returns to consciousness and their mouth is closed but not chewed, place your hand over those powders of scented wax, and also apply some olive oil; and then gently rub them.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on their stomach, with their head between two earls, so that they do not cause any injury to the part below or to the left; and do not force any caution; if the abdomen has been circumcised, then when the pain becomes more severe and the jaw is swollen, then you can apply pressure as desired.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this is administered with ease, and do not work over the edge of the mouth, but only on the food, chewing, and swallowing, if the jaw is swollen and healthy.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at some time and not converted into their proper places, then apply gentle pressure with your hands, along with frequent baths, and cold drinks, and much care should be taken of the abdomen of the patient, and much vomiting of pure choler.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you see that the patient is suffering, and the days pass by slowly for that which happened to them in those days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reducing the displacement of the shoulder girdle and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder girdle is not dislocated from the lat bone by its continuous movement in the chest; and some are dislocated at the end of the part, and this is declared by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of that which was dislocated is to place the thigh over the side of the bed and extend the legs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And make sure to straighten the area with your hand using strong force, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place your hand over that plaster and powder and press it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The end of that which is placed over the thigh and is continuous in that part, is not dislocated at any time; you should reduce and tighten it according to what has been said and according to what appears to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand over that plaster and powder and tighten it, and command the thigh to adhere to the tightness and to return when it is cured.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	When this piece of medicine is reduced to the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitulum .xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the displacement of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated unless by three ways, of which one is dislocated at the beginning of the tendon to the end of it.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the muscle, and this is done with force; and it is not dislocated in the back by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is mainly dislocated and deformed and stretched in the parts beyond the tendon, and especially in those where the bones are few, it is mainly dislocated; but in those where there are many movable bones, it is more easily stretched out.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people are harmed by hitting or pressing, and the muscle of the other is twisted with a twist of the cauterant, and it is thus caused to be dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	When you have entered and are standing above the patient's body, and you begin to process in their care.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It is known that the dislocation of the joint occurs when you reach the parts beyond the limits of the foot, therefore you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the muscle in its place, and between the different manifestations of the dislocated muscle and the cap of the concave muscle, and the touch of the cap of the dislocated muscle is that which a hound has, and at the ankle it cannot reduce the foot to the upper part of the shoe, nor can it be held by any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the joint is dislocated, you must reduce the joint or suspend it, and you touch the muscle with your finger, and do not hesitate.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is made with a slight reduction when it is fresh and the ankle is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of the joint is that which raises the part of the joint to the parts beyond the limits of the foot; and places the toe under the dislocated muscle, and strengthens the joint on its own place, and the minister raises the part of the joint, and extends it there; and places it again so that it returns gradually.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If the pain does not return after a few days, and it is not due to dislocation, then the cause of the injury is likely an infection. In this case, the affected area should be washed with warm water and mild soap, and then dressed with sterile gauze or bandages. The area should be kept clean and dry, and the patient should be advised to rest and avoid any activities that may cause further injury. If the pain persists or worsens, the patient should seek medical attention immediately.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	If the injury is a sprain or strain, the affected area should be immobilized with a splint or bandage to prevent further injury. The patient should avoid putting weight on the injured area and rest it as much as possible. The patient should also keep the area elevated above the level of the heart to reduce swelling and pain. If the pain persists or worsens, the patient should seek medical attention immediately.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If the patient is in pain, the injury can be reduced as follows: first, ensure that the affected area is not being held in place by any external forces. Then, gently move the affected area to relieve any tension or strain. The patient should then be advised to rest and avoid any activities that may cause further injury. If the pain persists or worsens, the patient should seek medical attention immediately.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	When the patient is lying down, you should cover them with a blanket and another cloth on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. If the patient's leg is dislocated, it is best to suspend it in such a way that the dislocation returns as soon as possible.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	If the swelling is reduced by another method: and if it remains on the ground a long stake with its head at the top, like a mortar, which is neither large nor thin, and places it over the patient's head, with the leg in line with the length of the stake, and extends the arm of the patient to the parts on the other side; and extends the part of the leg of the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it is difficult to reduce the swelling by all means mentioned, you can use this treatment: and if you take a stake of the length of two braces, and the width of that is four inches, and the largest part of it is placed in the tittilic according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	When you have covered the head with a cloth, such that it does not reveal the face, then proceed.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then place your hand on the anus, and extend the arm or bracelet over it, and make sure the hand is visible to the assistant and the arm and end of the bracelet.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place your hand on a scale according to the latitude, and extend the arm to the sides, and the other part should be suspended from the other side, so that the joint can enter as far as possible.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the joint of the limb is completed according to your ability, and you make sure that you hold the anus with your hand such that it hangs down from the tail; and apply plaster made of powdered wool and alum over the entire muscle, as far as it can be rolled up, and tighten the anus with a stricture; and the limb is rolled over the plaster, and the leg of the limb is attached to the neck of the limb, and it is reduced, and there is no harm to the limb for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When it is necessary to rest the patient's leg, then enter with that member and lay down the cloth on the bed of the patient.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if the leg is given more rest or exercise; and then if it stops and does not become softened, you have already been healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to motions that happen to it or by another cause, then you should know that in that case three points of cauterization are given, according to what is said at the end of cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if this is true and the limb slides for about three days without the joint being closed, and the plaster and traction are reduced over some parts of it, and it does not close and cannot lift that arm to the parts desired, you know that the nerves of the same muscle have already been cut or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will not be stuck in place forever.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	When the dislocation of that which is given, you must have the chest and the milk or the parts behind, reduction is made by compression and extension at the maximum, within which it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When the other stricture is administered and the entered part is cured that is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If the pain becomes severe in the member and slows down the movement, then use cold compresses made of wet cloths that enter and alleviate the pain and return to the original nature of the first member.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of hernia displacement.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the thigh is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and most in the part where the part begins and ends, and the displacement of the hernia is not avoided by you as much as you can when you are sitting or standing, according to which figure is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated thigh to its place, it is clearly declared to you that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch that the other muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover the thighs and reduce the displacement as much as possible until it comes to the appendage of cauterization, where if you see the appendage of cauterization, it is difficult to reduce the displacement, and most of them are not cured completely; and particularly when it comes to the posterior parts, where there is a bad effect on all other types of displacement, and with greater pain, and cold compresses are applied to that one.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When restoring the body, when it is possible to reduce, it is that the body of the patient should be extended as much as possible, and the arms should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are over the thighs and behind him, and he pricks the joint with his nails on the tips of his fingers or in the palm of his hand as it turns in its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the joints, then return as soon as you can double the body of the patient over the thigh, entering that it presses on the hand with the tip of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two masters extend the arms, and hold those joints with two masters so that the extension is not lost.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And if it rotates the arm, then the entire part must revolve, because it wraps around the body of the patient doubled long on his shoulder or limb.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, use any ointment so that those causes that help in lubrication of the joint are facilitated; and press the joint with a strong push when it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	When the reduction of that cover which is placed over the abscess in which stitching and excision of the albuminous matter has been done, and which is also subject to stricture descent, and the arm is suspended from the collarbone, and left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And if it is slipped; and then, if the joint is formed in that place, you should slip the limb and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not becoming tighter, then you should reapply the plaster to the limb and leave it there for several days after it has been stretched; and then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If something happens to you that gravitates towards the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then you should apply hydration in the bath and gentle friction, and compression, after it has been released; or rest on the moved joint, which is the fatty tissue; and then remove the limb, and leave it on the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove the limb and put it in the bath; and when you dry it, you should gently rub the joint with the tempered friction, and then go over the moved one, which is the first, second, and third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	When the humor is too hot, it comes out of the body in the form of a lump, and it is called an "am intrament de
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you want, stop over the wet and slippery blade of the cow and hold it firmly with your hand; and make some cuts, pull out the wet part and reduce it to its size.
Capitol .xxviii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not a complete sentence or
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The text translates to: "Of the treatment of shoulder dislocation, it is from the joint that is between the arm and the shoulder.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When a joint is dislocated in some part of the body, and the reduction of the dislocation is slow, and it differs from other dislocations, but rather because of the velocity of the reduction in the hour when it is dislocated, which is either due to the part being atrophied or to the dislocation occurring in a muscle that has atrophied.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's thigh over a table and extend the joint of that leg, and the other hand or palm is placed on the insertion of the muscle, and presses it inward until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider whether the palm has already been placed on the abdomen of the thigh, and if so, the other hand presses the thigh's two legs on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes the two legs of the thigh, then the position of the thigh's two legs on the table should be intrinsically, so that the doctor's palm covers the insertion of the muscle.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if you return soon, well; and if not, then stretch that muscle as much as possible and let it go; and do not forget this, otherwise, you will not be able to reduce the joint in days to come.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. However, the cause of the joint is not clear; instead, it is softened and cannot be attributed to any cause. You should know that the nerves are divided or torn, and they are not stretched only because they are sore, but also because of the cauterization of the cavity and the force that causes the pain.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when the wound is returned, place your hand over it and keep it there for days; and make sure to keep it clean and moistened with the patient's own fluids, and exercise the joint as much as possible.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of the joint is left and happens in any way that causes pain, you should apply a cool poultice with an astringent to relieve the swelling and reduce the inflammation. If this does not help, you may need to consult a doctor.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some fingers are dislocated in their entirety.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When it happens that someone dislocates one of those on the back of the hand or on the abdomen of the patient, then you hold the part and push it back into its place, if it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And hold the head of the finger, suspend the part from which it was dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And suspend the part and extend it when it is dry in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When it is dry, read that second part of the story, and do not slide it on that day and exercise it in movement, and keep it straight; and do this for several days until it becomes straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And appear as if this is the case, if it happens to be dislocated in the abdomen of the belly, and hold it at that place and make the first surgical operation, when it becomes healthy.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And appear as if this is the case when it happens to be dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol. (This is likely a placeholder or indicator that the
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of displacement of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an injury occurs to one of the vertebrae or collarbone, and there are other vertebrae that remain unaffected, and in that case no care is given, then death often occurs at the hips.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	When it comes to the matter of the patient's menstruation, it is outside their will and cannot be held back; and if they are not able to bear it, then their limbs may become soft or their chest may change shape, or one of those; or a spine in that location may become bent, and if it becomes bent, then the removal of those parts is divided into four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that has already been divided into four parts and is no longer able to be glued together.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure of the patient depends on whether the gluing has been done prematurely, for if it has, then that part is not cured nor can it be cured by that part alone.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that part where pain is felt by touch or by percussion or by appearance, the ancients had different methods of curing, of which the most effective was the one that relieved the patient's suffering; and you have already opened that part where too much blood has been lost due to the patient's lack of blood, for the reason that I am closer to the understanding of the exposure, of which I have explained and demonstrated with different instruments of that kind that I show you and explain.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in yellowish discoloration that occurs in the chest, there is no inflammation or treatment for it; and apparently in that which is made at two lances.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, it is not cured except for the one that occurs in the two parts mentioned by me as I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And if the hernia is extended over the face and below the jaw, and it is extended further down the stomach to prevent it from pressing on the chest.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place another hand on the ground at the end of the jaw around the head of the hernia, and another hand on the feet of the hernia at the other end of the thigh.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the hand, and does not stay in the hollow; and another minister holds the other in that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the head of the hernia and tighten the leather strap; and extend the end of the strap to the hand that you must hold the head of the hernia, and tie it there; and also tie the other strap over the ankles of the hernia's legs and adjust all the straps and tie the other end to the hand that you must hold the feet of the hernia.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	When the minister extends the limb to the point of the thigh, and does not leave any knots or ties in the two thighs and limbs from which they are tied, it is not necessarily that the patient will remain still as they have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places his hands on the spine for strength as he returns, or places them on that one table, and accordingly adjusts the weight of the bones as they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If he does not return in this manner, then you take a table whose latitude or longitude is in the middle of three points, and dig into the side of the table where they have said that the malaise has a location at the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And the doctor places the table's mattress on the spine, and the doctor places his hands on the other end, and he stretches as soon as the spine is straight and returns to the original location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the one that is turning as it was; and that is what you must do on earth, that the cap of the malaise is at the end of the two thighs, whose longitude is a arm's length, and the cap is at the end of the two thighs with the most weight, and the longitude is between one fist and the other, and it has been made in each fist as it turns, and each one must remain on the ground because it is not good.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	If it is a thrust, and it is turned in the two directions of the two fists.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	At the end of the fist, there is a groove in which a finger is formed, the length of which is similar to that; and in the other two fists, it appears similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the tendons that you have stretched in the chest of the patient in the groove that you must, and the tendons that you have stretched in the thighs in the fist that you must, the fist that you must, the fist that you must.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And each fist and there must be a master who turns the fist at its will, and the hand covers the spine according to what has been said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the fist:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then return the spine, and cover the area with your hand, as if you were pressing an excised piece of flesh from the abdomen, and stop; and place your hand over the edge of the table of which the latitude is three degrees or more around those, and the longitude is the quantity that takes the place of the yellowing, and over the end of the spine SA.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	When you have found the cause of the pain that has been described, and use the medicinal nutrients that are suitable for the body.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If you find any signs of inflammation in the area near the end of the treatment, then it is necessary to administer medications that are anti-inflammatory and have a long-lasting effect, as recommended; and the inflammation has already been treated with the appropriate dressing.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	If some signs of displacement have been found in the lower back of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and the spine has already been treated for that reason, but it still does not seem to be healing properly with this medicine, as much as I recommend it to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitulum XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Chapter XXXI on the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not always indicate dislocation, but only when it happens to those that happen to the other small removals and concavitations.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And if the joint of the ankle is dislocated, it happens in four ways: either by the fingers, or by the toes, or by the heel, or by the behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	When discussing the dislocation of the thigh bone in its parts, when you adjust the bandage of the healthy leg, it becomes long and bends too much that of the healthy one, and the leg cannot bend the knee you have to straighten, and it is the place where you stretch the strap of the strap cautery for so that the end of the thigh does not come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	This is about the cause of that which happens to the dislocation, because the accidents of it are contrary to this one.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	This is about the cause of that which happens to the dislocation in the parts below, because the bandage expands the knee secondarily, but does not bend the pain that is in the denial, and if it passes through to go and cannot be over there in the parts below; and the urine of the patient is retained and the anus of the patient is stretched, and you have to put the ambulance of the patient on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	This is about the cause of that which happens to the dislocation in the parts behind, because the bandage does not expand the denial, nor can it bend the pain that bends the anus, and the bandage is shorter than the other, and the anus is softened, and the end of the thigh is placed in that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The first source sentence translates to:
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	When the dislocation is recent in that part, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you should cut along that which you pulled out and extend it to the parts of the fingers and toes, and also to the parts of the thumbs and big toes. And if it returns without needing another treatment, it is fortunate.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If the dislocation does not return in this manner, then you should prepare yourself for a hard and extended ministration. Extend the arm at the point where it was previously dislocated, or at the part that is most comfortable for you, or at the part that is most convenient for the patient's hand; and another ministration extends the arm as far as the fingertips of the patient; and hold the tendon firmly over the knee, and keep another ministration on the extremity of the tendon.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is extension of the arm or of the finger to the angle at the angle of the elbow, or to the angle behind the elbow.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it is extension of all those in a straight line within which the thigh is raised and the foot hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is specific to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If displacement returns as they have said, then so be it; and if not, then you must be entirely specific about what you mean by your own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the parts of the fingers, it is necessary that the thigh be stretched over the table; and then pause the limbs over the part of the hip in that place which is between the head of the hip and the place where the laxation ends; and then extend the limb from the part of the angle to the other part of the shoulder.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And if another strong minister grasps the braces of the thigh, and makes the large part of the thigh flat and extends the parts on either side by force, so that it returns to its original position.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is used for the treatment of this member by which the other members are reduced.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you excuse me and do not obey the entrance of this method of treatment for all, then you should know that the two thighs of the patient are tightly held by strong limbs, the hands on the ankles and the feet on the knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	When measuring the length of a part of a person's body by the quantity of four fingers, and the malady extends more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And if the malady is suspended over the head of the foot, and it is in the largest part; and the length of it from the ground is the quantity of two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And commands a young man to cut off the head of the thigh, and suspend it on the malady of another young man, and the other young man supports the thigh with increased force, so that the joint returns to its original position at high speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when dislocation occurs at the end of the part, it is certain that the malady hangs over the leg according to what has been recommended in the past; and holds the limb tightly on the malady properly and on the chest of the person.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And if two thighs are placed, one on the foot and the other on the head; and if the thighs are adjusted to the peg that is on the side where the humors are enveloped, so that the malady does not hang out because the thigh is between the thighs of the person, so that you do not extend too much to the parts behind, which would be torn.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	When each physician extends their hand to the affected area, they should gently reduce it according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If you obey the reduction, do so very gently; otherwise, pause diligently and follow what has been said in the manual for that dislocation.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May this treatment help to relieve your pain.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation is reduced to its proper position, gently extend the cushion, and follow this method; the physician should place their palm on the affected thigh and hold it steady, and then pass that extension to the other hand, and to the other part of the cushion.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is reduced to the rear part of the thigh, do not extend the cushion to the front part, and lift it off the ground; if there is pain in that area, then place your hand on a hard object, as described for the knee joint over two thighs; and place your hand on the face and extend the limbs according to what has been said, without causing any harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When the joint is being treated with pressure, place the table over the location where you want to apply the compression.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, when the joint is completely reduced — and the sign of reduction is not mistaken for you, and it is that you extend from the thighs to the hips, and when you see those bones and the hip extends the thigh bone and expands at that expansion, you know that the member next to the reduced one is also returned — and you adjust the thighs and place a cushion and extend the bandage so that the width is not too wide in any of the parts; and adhere the hips to the body for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And remove the bandage and the cushion, and compare one thigh to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those bones in their place, you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then remove the hips from the body.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, return to that and apply the plaster to that, and extend it after your first stretch, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	When one follows that path, and allows it to rest for several days, especially if it is comfortable, it will be beneficial.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol. xxxii. is a Latin phrase that translates to
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: first by the front, second by the sides, and third by the back; and the parts that are not affected are not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that the patient commands the thigh to apply its cushion on the leg; you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the limbs of the shoulder is that you stretch the thigh to the right, if it can extend the thigh cushion over there; hold the thumbs against the shoulder's face, and place the finger between the thumbs on the shoulder of the dislocated arm; and then fix the elbow of the dislocated arm against the palms, and stretch the thumbs over the elbow of the shoulder to strengthen it, and another minister extends the thigh enter that the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When it comes to the matter of relieving the patient's pain, it is said that their shoulder adheres to the thigh and does not allow for labor.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	When applying the plaster to that part and allowing it to adhere to the thigh, and applying the bandage over it using a needle for three days or four, and then removing it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the bath for more than three days, unless it is cured and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hip is excused, you must administer strong doses of medicine from those that were used in the cure of the previous injury.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes has a partial displacement, and sometimes a complete one, and the dislocation of the ankle is made either at the ends of the toes or at the ends of the fingers.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that sometimes the toes are flattened at the point where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The cure of the partial displacement of the ankle is of little benefit, and it is extended to the most easily accessible parts and is abandoned when it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When in the treatment of the patient when a second dose is given, one should make sure to follow the direction of the thigh, and hold it with a strong and skilled hand in the back part of that on the patient's side of the bed.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	When the second toe of the swollen foot is affected, and the left side of the toe is painful, then apply your thumb to the affected area.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And apply your thumb to the affected area of the foot, and apply pressure with your other hand on the opposite side, and extend the hand; and push the chest with your thumb to release the catch.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make cuts according to the number of stitches needed.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And push the chest with your thumb to the second cut, and you are in the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If you return to the same or two cuts with this hand, and you see the foot swell, stop; and if not, continue the operation by moving on to the next cut.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are not allowed to reduce the foot as recommended, place a pillow on the side where the knee is, and make a mark in the ground that is firm, and that fits between the thighs of the patient, and you have already covered the leg so that it does not touch the wound.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	When the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot over the patient's knees or the sole of the foot; and extends that same minister against the extension of the leg, and the hand is placed between the patient's thighs to retain it, so that this part of the body is not extended beyond its extent.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the mason reduces the displacement of the bones more, and another servant holds the healthy thigh, so that the displacement returns to the ease of the parts further away.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the displacement returns and you declare the health of the reduction to me, stop plastering and extend that part greatly, and tie the foot to the leg firmly.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to harm the nerves that are behind the heel, so that the sole over there does not become too tight and weakens that part.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it for two days or three; and if the sole becomes soft, extend it further.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third day or fourth day; and forbid the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If one is about to leave that space, it is not safe to assume that the displacement is not on the dissolved and corrupted part, and therefore it does not receive care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you come across this caustic application, remember to administer in the hydration of the water we have described in our narrative, in another place of care and embalming, if it is necessary.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitulum .xxxiiii. (Chapter 324)
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the care of the displacement of the joints of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Remember that the one who is dislocated should be gently stretched as much as possible; and that is not difficult, it is enough to apply the following.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the displacement is in the heels of the feet, remember that you must stretch the calf muscles of both feet over a flat surface or on a table, and be as if you were about to stand up.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And if you stand on your feet, and place your hand on that which is above the joints, and carefully stretch it while returning, and see that it has stretched and does not appear in the most prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place a board under the belly of the patient's foot, which holds the entire foot, with two holes, and stretch it gently but firmly for three days; and then remove it and let it heal through walking for a few days, until it is stretched and secure.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol, Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the special causes of dislocation that are caused by pain or fracture or in any other way.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When one of those causes occurs and you are in the treatment of that and the restoration of the body, many successful cases have been observed with death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore it is not assumed that the treatment of the body presupposes anything, but rather what is known in the art, long-term, merciful and compassionate, gradual, not hasty nor presumptuous; and it should be used at the beginning of medicines that only take postems cautiously, and the legs to the divine judgment, not to that which one hopes for salvation from loss, but for the relief of the malady and in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	When you have exerted yourself so much to reduce the swelling at the beginning of the cause, it will eventually lead to gout attack.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	If the member returns second, administer the regimen that reduces gout and cures the inflammation caused by the cold humors.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation is mistaken for fracture and occurs in the separated bones, you should perforate the statement of those, and make sure that they have said in the simple diseases of this that it is preceded in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid after your virtue that intrament in the ways of fear, following which is preceded by my preaching; for this is better for you to serve the true Creator, and less permanent for your glory, and less salutations to you as you see those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	I hope these words of Albucasim are perfectly understood by God, who is not benefited.
Amen.	Ameno.
