Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The first line of the text translates to "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	The first line of the text translates to "O, fools, you have completed this book, which is the end of medical science, as the conclusion of his work, and through the examples of his work, and the declarations of his work, I see that you have comprehensively covered this for you in this treatise, which is part of the operation from my hand, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The first source sentence translates to:
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	It is observed that you are alive in this order of this treatise on the second way of exposure and declaration, and for the reason that you will come to the forms of the instruments of cauterization and of the other tools of the work as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of the same, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause for which the artisan is not able to create the artifact as desired in the past, it is because the art of medicine has become longer in this current time, and that the actor is not yet exercised in the science of anatomy which Galien knew after he knew the properties of the members and their shapes, and the connection and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and tendons, and their number, and the quality of them, and the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of the excitations of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	For that reason, says Iocaste (also known as Yoprasus), who has a small work but mainly in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have not yet spoken of that in the introduction of this book; for what we have said about anatomy is not without error, which causes many men to die, as you have seen many of them, who are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You have seen a surgeon folding and experiencing an abscess in the thigh of a woman, and incising some arteries of the thigh so that great blood flows out when the woman dies between the shoulders of you.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	I saw another doctor who said that he had seen a stone in the urine of a man who had been in his state, and the stone was large, and it came out of the bladder through a small opening, so that this man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	I then called for help to remove that stone, and I saw that it was due to its large size and the position of the bladder that it would cause the man to die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	I saw another doctor who received payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he went to a blacksmith who was known for his skill in fixing fractures in the thigh; and this doctor, being ignorant of the procedure, tried to fix the fracture with plates and bolts, but did not successfully close the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And it slipped according to the will of God, and the bone was set, and it healed over time and commanded that we unbind the leg; and I thought that the thigh and the foot would be better, but it turned out that the thigh and the foot were worse.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	When you summon him and he appears, take the linen and gently unwind it, and achieve calm and ease to alleviate his pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if corruption was confirmed in the member, it could not be stopped from spreading, and the corruption could not be stopped from spreading throughout the thighs.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	I saw another doctor who performed an appendectomy and had ulcers appear after a few days, due to the malice of the lord of the house.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cramp is purely due to melancholic humor, and it does not come from the lord of the house, but rather from the member that has suffered from all of this, which has been harmed by all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	Therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be performed in two parts: one part is in the operation associated with health, and the other part is in work with the larger possessions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed in this free place where the operation was performed in which errors and fear were committed; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard this and lay that, so that the children do not fall into speaking and telling lies to you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	When you have prepared your weapons for the sake of your own concern and protection from God, and your wounds are open and uncovered.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	When you use the best way through the grace of God, those who are lost in salvation and praise find success, and you treat the most terrible wounds with difficult surgery, and you keep your weapons ready for that which terrifies you, so that your faith and your name do not escape: four things remain to your glory, and one more in the world and in the afterlife among your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Glory has already been given in some of my enemies:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat wounds poorly, because bad doctors do not know how to.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already had to follow this free lesson three capital laws.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the free, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first law ordered at the head of the foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the force of the cautery, and for that which is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second source sentence to translate:
Divisio de la tersa partida.	This sentence seems to be discussing the division of a certain part or section. However, without more context, it's
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	This sentence appears to be discussing the capital (or main) chapter of something related to restoration and displacement, as well as the care of bends and semblances for those. It is ordered from the head down to the feet, and from the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	This sentence seems to be discussing the use of cauterization, which is a medical practice involving the application of heat or a chemical agent to a part of the body for therapeutic purposes. It mentions that it is also used in acute
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	This sentence appears to be discussing whether the previous text (or "commensa") covers the entire topic of freedom. However, without more context, it's difficult
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	This sentence seems to be asking whether you question the quality of the remedies (or "juvamentz") and instruments (or "noccumentz") used in that cauterization, and in which collection or category it is prohibited. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	This sentence appears to be discussing the sermon (or "sermo") about the quality of the remedy and instrument used in cauterization. It states that it is a long and prolix (or tedious) sermon, subtle (or delicate) in its knowledge, and secret (or hidden). It has been spoken to a great number of wise men, and they have disagreed about it, and for me, a little of their words is enough to fear longing. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	I now say that cauteries comfort all composite bodies universally, which are made of the same matter or its matter, except for two composites, which are cauda (tail) bodies made of the same matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the collection of dry and decaying matter, there are those who use cauterization for that, and others use the opposite, which is not suitable for diseases that are caused by lack of quality and dryness, because nature of the fire is also lack of quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that diseases of the tail and dry skin are cured by being burned and dried.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And if you disagree with what I said earlier, that cauterization is beneficial in all diseases of the tail and dry skin that are seen on the bodies of men, then when you compare the body of a man to the collection of fire and his humidity, you will find that the body of a man is burned.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And if you say according to that speech, that this has already been experienced by me in my own life, I have discovered it.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not know that this will come over time, that which has already been expropriated and exercised in the capital of cauterization for the exercise of the same, and knows the diversity of the bodies of men and their disposition of diseases in them, and their causes, and the accidents of the same, and the passage of time for the same.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complexes, it is not about your fear, and especially in wet and filthy diseases, such as gout and fever, all doctors are accustomed to using this method, and no one has ever been harmed by cauterization in these cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	It is wise, friends, that the secret of curing by cauterization is not known for its merit, but rather for the fire used in medicine, which is simple, and the effect of which does not reach the other member except the one being cauterized and not to the other members adjusted only to a small amount of pain.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Less the effect of combustible medicine reaches the other members except the one being cauterized, and more often it comes to the member of difficult cure and more often it is heard.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Less the fire, by its superiority and substance, does not do so much as it is superfluous. And we have learned this by experience and long practice of studying the art of the truth of causes; and therefore you are excused for the length of the discourse and if not that it is not related to my free will in this pause of your secret of the fire, and the quality of the operation of the knife in the body and the expulsion by which you expel the diseases, the philosophical discourse is demonstrated, which is sharp in your hands.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	When the wise children realize that it is not convenient to perform cauterization at the time of first attempt, they should wait for a more suitable time.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	You say that cauterization is convenient in all times, because the accident due to time is submerged in the advantage of the one who has the cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary pain, more and faster, the sufferers do not suffer delay because it is feared that those who come later will be greater than smaller harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And you do not care about your patients, or children, they only think of the common people and the lazy ones, because that cure which is done by cauterization is not always effective for a long time, and they leave the consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not that they are afraid of doing it for this, because cauterization is not only a place for medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the humidity which is the cause for the pain to come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, cauterization is overused in medicine because of its request for the virtue and excellence of its operation and the greatness of the Lord's servant.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's malady will return at some point in time, according to the composition of the illness and its location within the patient's body, as well as the virtue of the patient and the fact that it has been prepared in the heart of the patient due to the aggregation of excess elements in the body, and the fact that it has been received by the patient through vagaries and similar causes; however, if the malady that is being treated with cauterization is a subtle malady in a few parts of the member and with little moisture, then it is possible that it will not return to that pain, rather it will be in small pieces.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	It is said that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and it is a common saying, not because I understand it in it, but because I believe that cure does not rely on profiting from medicine or any other cause of cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	However, the cause is in contrast to that; and I understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is not only when they administer the remedies for cures in some diseases, and those medicines do not confirm, and instead in the end they manage hom with cauterization, and profit from it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	When making points with a pointed cautery, it is better than using a regular cautery, and it should not be done unless the gold is of equal quality to its own substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	It is important to ensure that the location of the cauterization does not burn, as it will not be absolutely effective if the gold is not completely exposed. If you have already tried and found that it does not work in other parts of the body, then using a pointed cautery is better than using a regular one. However, when performing cauterization on gold with a pointed cautery, it is important to consider the quantity of gold you want for the severity of the gold, and to prepare some fat for the recipient; and if you place the fat over the burned area, the gold will be in the fire, and there may be some layers for the artisan to occupy themselves with.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Therefore, when performing cauterization with a regular cautery, it is important to use it lightly and precisely during the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	You have already ordered this capital in the cauterization according to the other capitals, and you have ordered those of the foot inside the feet, so that the patient can easily get what they want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Le capitol primier.	The first source sentence to translate is: "De cauteri de dolor de
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers humidity and coldness upon the accidented part of which the painful cause is, causing sodomy and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the smooth parts of the hips and thighs, and numerous sleeplessness, and toothache and guolayro, and universally in all maladies that appear due to coldness, as if paralyzed, sodomy, apoplexy, and seeming in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this, which first commands the patient to evacuate the head that has been cut open by a cautery, three or four times, according to the virtue of the body and its age and custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then commands him that race the head with a razor, and then place it between your thighs on a low stool and hold your hands over the chest you want.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the tip of your thumb on the nose of the pus that is under the skin between your fingers.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, as the saying goes in this place, that location is often targeted, and it is customary to use olive oil for this purpose, which is of the following form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	 And then place it on the location that is often targeted, with your hand that descends, which is of the following form: and you will turn that over.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then take your lighter and look at the location, and if you see already any amount of bone exposed in the cheek, as much as the amount of errors, then raise your hand, and if not turn your hand on that iron, and another of that, if it is frozen, enter that is seen of the bone that I have told you to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the location and rub that for three minutes.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your thumb on the edge of the burn and rub that over it until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	When treating the area with an antipyretic remedy, it is important that the area is properly prepared beforehand.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the Romans performed a cesarean section, they often used honey to prevent infection and improve the outcome.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They would cauterize the spine inside the bone and hold it in place until the cauterization was complete.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	If the patient's leg is affected by the disease, then it should be treated accordingly.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They would also use other methods such as the "alchemical catapult" if the cauterization did not work immediately. This is the method used for small wounds:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	It is estimated that the vapor of the head will be exhaled from that location.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If the wound is held for a long time and is properly treated, it will be cured when it is solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these special types of cauterization before, only in the hands of experienced surgeons; and that is why I say that it is better for your health when it is done, because the head is separated by a solution of continuity of the flesh as has been testified in other parts, and especially when the head of the thigh is freed from nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The specificity of the first point (cauterization) is safer and better done by me; and from that point on, it is more beneficial for the health.
Capitol segon.	The text you provided is in an old form of Latin, not
Del cauteri del cap.	similar to Italian, Spanish, or French. Here's a line-
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs all over the head, and it is prolonged in the skull, and there are used for dressings and bandages and purgatives and plasters and ointments and creams and washes, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that does not cause pain or irritation to that part of the skull caused by those causes, then consider if the head of the skull is of strong origin in its nature; and do not use too much and make it bleed greatly, and if that cauterization is done on another part of the head with a smaller cautery.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	When it is necessary to make points on the corner of the ear, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the coda and let it expose the bone quantity that has been found, and cauterize it with a cautery at the corner of the head in the place called the vas, — and that place is where the wind is paused.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And thank you for your attention, and do not discover the bone, as the thigh suffers from a different kind of pain than that caused by all other cauteries on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you direct this cauterization at that place, where the corn is that causes the cauteries on the head and the occipital bone is placed with a subtle cauterization that is applied to the same location of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	End of chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient non-migratory.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When in the corner of the head pain is felt, or if there is a sharp pain entering the wound, it should be evacuated with medicine from the head, and the other cure should be administered, which you have told in the chapters of the diseases; and do not profit from it, cauterization can be done in two ways: either with acute medicine burning or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	When using cauterization in medicine, you should take a red-hot poker, and carefully touch the ends of the wounds with the hot iron.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then, if you find the painful spot in the chest wall, use a thin needle and pierce it at the point where the pain is located, either above or below the ribs.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then, after tying the bandage around the affected area, leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage and clean the wound with water or soap, and let it dry in the open air if the place is exposed to the sun.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And cure that part as soon as it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you find any burning medications, use those that you have written about in the book of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Cauterization is followed by this method: ignite the following:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	 It is called a "clasp nail," which is shaped like a thimble with a curve in it, and is placed in the small hole at the tip of the toe.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And place your hand over the painful location, and roll your thumb around it gently so as not to rupture the artery that is present - and quickly turn the little iron around.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the quantity of blood that is rushed out by the dissection of the abdomen is less than what is expected, and you turn your hand over so as not to rupture the artery that is present - so that no pus comes out.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice of salt water to the affected area and place it there for three days; and apply a poultice of mullein leaves around the border, and take care to cleanse the wound as soon as it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, cauterize at the end of the tail with a cauterization, and keep an eye on the incision of the artery in this unusual place.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of ancient emigrant cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure the ancient wound that has been said of the previous cure, and what has been said in the divisions of the diseases, and do not take advantage of the cure, and sometimes by the disease that does not satisfy what has been said of the first cauterization in medicine or the cauterization in focus, you see that you should put the tail cautery through the location of the pain that is along the line of the longue of which the wound is the tail, or that; and lay down your hand for a moment and tense it there while incising the artery and pervenging it within the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is harmed by chewing, and that the lizard not be harmed and the nerves that cause that, and that it does not expand spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that branches, there is fear in the branching of the artery, and above all to that which ignores that he does and does not study and practice; and thus the operation is left to begin.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	When you arrive at the recall of the flow of blood in the case of an accident to the artery according to the right hand side, in the place where this free one is located.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you see that this wound does not respond to this cauterization and you see the corpse of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as they have met, and treat the plague when it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, maintain the cauterization that they said in the capital of stretching of the artery at the cauterization that has two points, and this cauterization is better and less frequent.
Capitol .v.	Capital.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization of the pain of gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the gout you feel pain due to cold and it is cured by causes local and by the other treatment that I have told you in the division, and the pain does not worsen, then ignite the cauterization, and this is the one that has the name of point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	 And place the point near the ignition, and be directed around the whole gout as the wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each example if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Along the joints of the golden elbow, place a cautery point by point as needed to treat the wound.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	If the cautery points are placed throughout the elbow, and then removed, and the wound is properly cared for, it will heal.
Capitol .vi.	Capitulum VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Chapter 6: Cauterization of Scarring.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Scarring that is treated with cauterization is not the only type of scarring that can be treated with cauterization, according to what has been said in the sections of the diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization for spasticity or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that scar of the turtura, use jewels and purgatives and gargle, and if your cure is not effective, you must cauterize the elbow three times: the first time on the golden elbow, the second time a short distance away, and the third time on the conjunctiva of the labia.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause the cauterization for the opposite side of the affected part, four mollfactions will not be visible until the part that appears to be healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize the part with the cautery at the end of the extremity of the small nail above the corner of the head, and at another place, the longer one of which is second in length to the said point, and then your hand depauses am cauteri when it is burned by the quantity of the fat of the species of the spine.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of cauterization, and it is special for the blacksmith, the form of which is drawn on paper.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, that part is quite thin and has few bones; and it covers the part with excessive flesh a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with what is called for in the process when it is healthy.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol, Volume VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy is present and it is treated with what has been said and does not confirm your medication and the patient does not have a fever, then you should cauterize that part with four cauteries: on all the corners of the head; and at the corner of the head where they have mentioned; and at the corner of the cheek.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	When the cautery hand is made according to what is said, it is customary to call it a glove.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And if it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is less painful; and it is customary to call it a gastrocolic.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Cauterization of forgetfulness is made with a hot iron.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is customary to give the patient large doses of pills at the beginning, which are meant to make him feel better.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then take the entire head of the patient and place it on the cheek that is opposite to the one described in the chapter of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And hold the patient's head there for a while, then place the cautery hand on it.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Then do as is said according to those measures.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If for those who are healed, it is; and if not, then do three cauterizations on the same side of your head, which are taken from the corner of the nose that goes into the corner of the mouth that is opposite to the one that is closest to the chin.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cauterization of the said point, and properly care for the cauterization as it proceeds.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you add more and the thigh is tolerant, place the cauterization in its proper location; and if you see more addition, cauterize it on both sides of the hips.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Properly care for that which is becoming healthy; and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of parasites and hardening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in hardening of the head and as it has been said; and remove the head of the thigh, and properly place the cauterization on the said point of the head, and cauterize on all parts of the head, and cauterize on the opposite side of the leg, and three times cauterize on the spines of the collarbone.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the hardening of the body of many parts and tolerant thighs and strong belly, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the spines of both sides, and then cauterize within which is corroded by the mot of the belly, and raise the other leg.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	When treating that part which is healthy, and this is olive oil cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Capitol, Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized the epileptic except that epilepsy is by strangulation.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is necessary to change the brain of the patient at the beginning of the menstrual cycle and in the other treatment that has been prescribed in the division when the womb is large and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the child who did not suffer from medicines, administered gastric medications and sedatives, and changed the food for several days, improved significantly in the nutrition.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And cut off the top of the womb, and cauterize that part with a cauterization on the side of the head next to the previous hand, and another cauterization on the occipital bone of the head, and over every corner of the head it should be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the womb is strong and tolerant, you cauterize that part with the cauterizations I have mentioned, with almost paralysis and softening of the chest over the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	If the cauterization is followed by oil.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is young, then stop cauterization with this hand.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol, Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are cold and corrupt humors that have become large and flaccid, then cauterize those parts with the cauterizations that have been mentioned for paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity that becomes melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then give him this ointment that cleanses the brain according to what was given before in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And shave the head of the patient, and make a circular cut around it, and then place it in the appropriate location of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is sixty years old and is held by the whole body.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply the liniment; and it is worthy of being bound with ancient wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire, with gentle heat according to measure, which the sufferer endures when it is near to him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	When it is necessary to apply heat to the head of the patient in the circle, and let it enter until it is warm.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And apply a poultice to the thigh for the entire week, or in another treatment of the bowel that enters when it is healthy; or if you prefer, make small points on the skin according to the smallest part of the bowel, unless you have a ready-made cauterant: this is a special kind of cauterization that hydrates the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And stop that hair from growing on the border or in the gray areas of the scalp.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of water descending in the heel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are declared the beginning of water in the heel by the sailors who I have told you about in the division, then begin and give it to the head of the patient with your hand on the bow, and hold that over all the moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that saturate in water for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And order that the patient raise his head, and cauterize that with the cauterant on the designated location of the head; and if it is the beginning of the water in two heels, or in one heel if the water comes from two heels, or in one heel if the water comes from one heel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	When you cut all the veins and arteries that are left in the abdomen; and these cauteries are in the lower part of the temperature of the templates.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep track of the fluids that come out when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluids coming out, take some of the medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will know what is extracted from the arteries and the abscess of those and the caution of the fluids.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some are cauterized in the cervix, with two bones on each of the two cauteries produced differently.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol.xiii. (This is a page number or section heading
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient tears. (This sentence seems to be discussing the use of cauterization in treating eye problems
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are naturally and through the veins and arteries that are in the location manifestation of the head deformed and it is observed that this is superfluous fleshy flaps, then you cauterize that with the cauterization of the one that has been found in the beginning of the water that is stuck in the eyes, and you cauterize in the middle of the head and you have two cauteries in the cervix and you have two cauteries on the bones. (This sentence seems to be providing instructions for treating eye problems using cauterization)
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If you need to add something, then make points on the entire length of the horse's tail over the tip of the little cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you are treating that which has been said in the division and does not benefit from your medication, then show yourself and give to the thighs of the patient three knots; and take the head of the patient, and cauterize the small cauterization with an olive-colored cauterization.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that small cauterization with the olive-colored cauterization on the two tips of the thighs, and cut the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep away from the archery that you did not burn that one.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the cauterization.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization of softening of the eyelids of the horses.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the horse is softened by lack or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cauterization on this cauterization; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you, make an incision on that side of the two thighs with a small piece of cauterization, and make the incisions long enough for the timepieces.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cauterization is according to the amount of thigh.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your needle, but according to the amount that the last part of the eyelid is thin.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitulum .xvi.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cauterization of the eyelid of the cat when the whiskers are converted into parts of the fingers and thumb of the cat.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the whiskers of the cat are converted into parts of the fingers and thumb of the cat, make an incision in those with two hands, four cauterizations or as much as possible, or with medical fire.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you want to cauterize with fire, command the cat to sit down and look at its whiskers as if they were those of a human, and if the cat's paws are prolonged and engulfed; and if you need to hold the cat's paw, stretch your thumb over it with something that is not hurtful to the whiskers of the cat if they were born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When a person is born and begins to cry, you should stop the mouth of the child in the middle of the nose, and cover the eyes of the crying child with your hand, and then say to it, "This is like the figure of a dead fox, and this is the beginning of the speech from your father.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then put a stopper in the bottle or in a jar over the hazelnut.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And light the cautery that this is the form of the fire.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize on the figure that you have covered, little by little, in circular motions, until the surface of the skin is burned like a candle, and it appears completely properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And say to the patient that the health of the second work is that you see the eyelid already closed and the eyes of the child raised, you must make a puncture in the hazelnut.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it there for three minutes, and cover the bottle with your hand when the heat is produced.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And care for that am as soon as it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	When the catheter returns to the eyes for any reason and the eyelid is softened, then make another cut on that same spot as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the catheter is in the eyelid, then make a cut inside that part which is raised to the natural location and is engaged and does not touch the eyebrow.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	The cauterization in medicine is this that you command on the thigh which the eyelids enter that are prolonged and engaged, and it should be made on a piece of paper in the shape of a bird's beak.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some cotton and live coal and apply it to the inside of the eyelid. And, or rather, and mix those causes with it, and make it a paste for you to use when it is not hot; and spread that over the paper which is made in the shape of a bird's beak, and place that over the other eyelid; and place the eyelid cutter in the album of the hand, and the head of the thigh should be at the top.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	When the doctor pauses about medicine and asks for a small amount of medicine, that small amount is placed in the mouth, as if from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then, when the patient perceives that the pain is relieved, you apply the medicine and moisten the mouth with that; then, when the pain ceases, you remove the medicine from the mouth and wash your eyes with water; and you consider whether the eyelid has been removed in the same way as it is washed with hot or cold water, which is best; and if not, return to the medicine to the place where it has not been applied before and does not damage the operation and does not spoil the cheek.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then stop over the edge of the wound that has been cut out, and cure that which is inflamed or otherwise, according to what is healthy.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary for you to do your operation, you must guard it with the diligence that is required in the mouth, and if the eyelid is not falling down and there is no cause for the piles in the mouth, you should repeat your medicine over that part of the eyelid that is being softened, and return to what you have done at the beginning, and enter when it is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of the fumet of the martyr.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You know that the pulses of men vary according to their size and thickness, and therefore, according to this, your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not make haste in the path of rectum to that to which you are studying in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure fistula as they have said in the divisions of the maladies and do not confirm your cure, then you should cauterize according to this manner: command the patient to hold their head in the highest position, and hold the head of the patient between their hands in such a way that it is not painful nor agitates the head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then pause the cauterization in the album of the hool or on the mucilage of ptilli over the hool of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cauterization that this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	that is cured, it is like a cane or a pen of the tail, from one end to the other where the cauterization is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you please, pierce it through to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you want to be sure of the result, try it.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, it is better to consult a specialist than to rely on the second operation.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	When the fistula is properly closed and there is an opening for the sore and drying, then...
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not closed, open it and remove the wound of the leg.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the cautery over it that is not ignited, and take a little of the cautery from the heel to the tip of the nose, so that your hand does not hurt and the patient's thigh is quieted, and then place the cautery on the heel and smear it with that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the beginning of the cauterization goes into the bone, it is; and otherwise, you must repeat the cauterization once or twice, if necessary; and then leave it there for three days, and place your hand over it to border and envy it until it is dry and healthy.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it has been passing for many days and is not cured, then you must stop the acute, corrosive medicine and enter the bone when it is discovered and is rough second according to the caput.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another kind of cauterization for the fistula that the first ones have discovered: go to the location of the fistula and open it and pause in that subtle fissure where the form of the fistula is; and take a quantity of one unc of the plum fundut; and then put your hand on it with good retention, and do not make the thigh bad for so that the plum fundut does not reach the heel of that; and cover that over the heel of the thigh with albumin or water, four plums adhere to the location of the fistula and heal it for wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is cured by this treatment and cauterization, then so be it; otherwise, you must administer enemas and reduce the fistula to the abdomen according to its location in their place.
Capitol .xviii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterization of the fissure, it can be.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	When visible blisters occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And how you cure those fissures as they have been told in the divisions and do not waste your care, if you do not know the cauterization small cautery according to this form that is used:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the cavity be according to the subtlety of the cotilla.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then pause that intestine immediately when this cauterization comes to those fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that as soon as it is healthy.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cauterization of the fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the uvula or palate or the corners of the teeth are infected and it bursts, and it becomes inflamed, and a fistula forms, and you cure that and do not waste your care, if you do not know the cauterization according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and you place that fire in the mouth of the fistula, and when the red fire reaches the prey of the mouth and the cheek, you make a wound or two; and you cure that as they have told us of the cure when it is healthy.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	When the abscess is removed and healed, so be it; and if not, you must discover the location and harm the corrupted bones according to what will appear in their capital.
Capitol .xx.	The first source sentence is "Capitol.xx." which is
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas." translates to "Of the cauterization of the teeth and the mollification of the ankles.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantemente, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda." translates to "When the ankles are softened by moisture and the teeth are rough, and these are treated with medicines that do not cure, then you should place the head of the patient's foot on the ground, and carefully ignite the cauterization in the form that will be most appropriate, as if you were to put the burning cauterization near the tooth and enter it into the mouth of the patient, so that the heat of the fire may reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols." translates to "And take your tool, and then make the cauterization some cuts according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And if the patient's mouth opens to drink salty water and holds it for an hour, and it is observed that the tooth is closed and the gum is strengthened and the moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol Section 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or in it is frostbite, or vermin, or the patient does not respond to medical care, then you should cauterize on that spot with two hands: either with cow hide, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with cow hide is that you take the skin of the cow and burn it in the iron cauldron, and then cut and wrap it around the extremity of the tooth, and then press it firmly on the painful tooth while it is cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, immerse wool or hide in the skin of that part, and press it on the painful tooth, and press it on that fire that is ignited until it reaches the neck of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	When it comes to cauterization, it is important that you attend to the part that is either made of bone or iron, and there should be any flesh in the body and the sharpness of the iron does not reach the mouth of the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then, carefully observe the form of the cauterant that will be used, and place it on the tooth and enter with your hand into that cauterant if it is hot; and make some observations to see if the pain remains or in that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And make sure that by pressure of that cauterant the wound of the patient closes the mouth of good border and holds it for an hour and removes the; and this is the form of the cauterant.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as you see fit, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of extremities.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the extremities are flexible and of cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines and you see that the digestion is only slightly affected, then carefully observe the form of this cauterant as follows: two ends should be set up for the smoke to rise from the other end, and place the ignited cauterant on the wound, and if necessary, enter with your hand into the wound to see if it reaches the point of the wound.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the fester does not increase much, stop the cauterization according to the amount of the fester, and then leave it for three days and press on the wound entrance with a cloth soaked in cool water as often as necessary to prevent it from becoming too moist.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that wound and try to dry it out and dress it as often as necessary to make it heal.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or cauterization is such.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitulum .xxiii. (Chapter 23)
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of rheumatism and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humors increase over the bronchus of the lung, and more so when there is coldness of the chest, you should make the patient take laxatives at the beginning of medicine, and then cauterize that point on the gallbladder in the area where it is damaged.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to get burned at the gallbladder or not char on the colon of the patient but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And you should cauterize that point with another cauterization at the joint of the knee in the lower spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The first line of the text translates to "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery." The second line, "E·l cauteri
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	The text translates to "Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out." The second line, "E·l
Capitol .xxiiii.	This line appears to be a page number, indicating that this text is part of a larger
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	The text translates to "Of cauterization for the lung and chest of the patient." The second line, "De cauterizacio de malautia del pul
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	The text translates to "When the chest and lung are affected by dampness and the patient does not have fever or chill and it is an old form of asthma, then cauterize that part with two cauters on the shoulder in the places where the wings and belly are separated; and another cauterization in the midst of the chest between two milks; and let the cauters be pointed according to the previous form." The second line, "Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua" translates to "When the chest and lung are affected by dampness and the patient does not have fever or chill and it is an old form of asthma." The third line, "lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz" translates to "then cauterize that part with two
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, let your cauterization be made with points on the cautery that is called a point, in the form of which you precede in the pain of gout.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And if points are made inside the skin, and it is important to care for that as it was done before when it was sick.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cautery has three corners for this cauterization, you can make three cauterizations following this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cauterization of the helper's elbow.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the elbow of the helper is dislocated due to humid, slippery substances and does not stop at the time of returning to its original position, and it must be moved slightly in the direction in which it was, as we have seen, the first reductions of the dislocation were reduced, and the foot is returned to the opposite side or to the latz; and then raise the collar that is in the part where the elbow is dislocated, if the joint is dislocated in the parts of the wrist.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	When it is necessary to cauterize the cord that penetrates into the other part of the lock, and one finds the figure of cauterization with four caps of cauterization.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And that is according to the quantity of tenths; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some threads are adjusted according to this count and those are the cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then stop over the cauterization point with something warm, and make the hernia adhere to the wound, and the member will not be harmed for a while until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in parts and tart, then cauterize over the muscle that is to be cauterized, either the clavicle or the point of the cauterization, where the joint is confirmed and the humidity is moistened and the hernia is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain is felt in the stomach and humors of moisture come out, and if you continue the cures and do not confirm, then you know that the hernia is on the left side, and extend your hands and legs and cauterize with three cauteries: one cauterization for the quantity of a certain clavicle cauterization, and two cauterizations for the two costals near the cauterization, until the figure of the triangular cauterization is found; and elongate those that are not adjusted to make a cut.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of the two-thirds of the length of the spine of the back.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the figure of the cauterization is this form, and if you want, cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cauterization according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is cauterized with points at that which of this cauterization is frightening: and you should place your hand over the stomach according to the quantity you want, and cauterize those points according to the cauterization; and cure that wound with the cure that has been previously done before it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the gouty toe.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the pain in the gouty toe increases due to coldness or wetness or large viscosity within which the normal part of the foot is gotten out by excess exudation, and the thigh is cured as they have said and does not comfort, you should place the thigh over the knee of the patient, and then cauterize three times according to this form and this quantity on the gouty toe after the hip bones, so that the decubitus of the patient is covered.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	When the space is equal to the size of the largest part of the body that is being treated with the cautery, and the cautery is placed along the length of the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not understand your amusement at the cautery tool.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is added is equal to the amount of the matured meat of the intestine, and it is not adjusted; and if the thigh is resting on the foot of the patient; and if not, then the patient should be lying down, having extended his legs, and raised his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And is this the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And are you able to use these cauteries as cautries, when you have the subtlety and prudence in the art?
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overprocess in the cauterization, and add enough meat to the entire intestine so that it is throughout the entire body and passes through the feet, where the intestine is thin; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Regarding the perforation of the plaster on the patient by the cautory.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an inflammation or abscess appears on the foot and one wishes to know if this abscess is in the flesh or in the skin, if it is in the flesh, the foot becomes heavy and painful at its tip.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain is sharp and often exhausts the doctors' care for the patient.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the thigh should be covered with the blanket over the hip bone; and then mark the location of the abscess that is about to appear; and then use the cautery that is suitable for the size, the form of which is described in the next page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize that and cauterize inside when the whole coat is burned, inside when it reaches the cistern, inside when it goes to the sinus.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And care for that by treating the other abscesses inside when it is cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	However, this method of cauterization is not used except for that which is studied in the art of medicine to prolong life and cure many diseases; but this has been experimented on some cases where it was ardent about this operation, but rather it is necessary for us and it is useful.
Capitol .xxix.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	The translation of "De cauterizacio de plauresi" is "On the cauterization of warts
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The translation of "Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit." is:
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	When you do not have a prescription for your pain, it is not recommended to use home remedies or over-the-counter medications without consulting a healthcare professional. It is important to seek medical attention if you experience persistent pain or other symptoms.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	It is known that some men use iron cauteries resembling rays and ignites in the area between the ribs, and if they penetrate into the lung and cause an abscess to be expelled outside the body, it is said in the postmortem of the patient.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this cauterization, there is no fear of injury, as it often occurs in the location where it is not possible to be cured.
Capitol .xxx.	Conclusion: In this medieval medical treatise, the author
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	From the cauterization of the gallbladder.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the gallbladder disease, it is said that the cure is made in the division and not to confirm your cure, you perform cauterization on it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of them is to make three cauterizations or four lines according to the length of the gallbladder according to the figure of the cauterizations of the patient, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	When there is a need to place the point between any cauterization and the largest part of a given or few pieces, and the hand of the cauterization is the same hand that has been mentioned in the cauterization of the engaged piece.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	You do not understand your own, but I understand the cauterization; and the thigh should be covered over the desired part.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And if another hand is to cauterize, it is because you do not understand the cauterization, which has caused the lack of two vertiments, which have been said in the capital of muscle dislocation, and the elava codena which is in the endreyt of the table for the jazer of the left thigh.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if your elevation is of the one that raises the codena according to the length of the body, because there are cauterizations according to the latitude of the cost.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And if you enter the two vertiments, ignis, mindfully, in that entrance where those penetrate the codena of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cauterization; and it is four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you are, use a cautery with three points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And if you carefully apply the cautery, so that it lies flat against the skin for a long time, it will be as comfortable as the previous causes in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of gout.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not used in gout, but in other diseases actually.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat gout with the medicines of curing that have been said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then you find that this cauterization uses four cauterizations around the belly, one on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the back, and two on the spine, and one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization is proper to the spice of the ribs.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And place the cauterizations carefully, so that they lie flat against the skin for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	When the surgery is completed with the hot iron as it should be, and the wounds are closed, and quickly help the patient to recover from the illness.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery is determined by what is being cauterized, whether it is the abdomen or the two thighs, according to the previous form, and that is the one used for that.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with stagnant water, it is customary to cauterize the feet on the back of the thigh in the same way as the ear and anus, and lift your hand away from the cauterization tool without pulling on it; and then lift your hand, and do not return to that position, for the stagnant water will not subside.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is done according to this form: On each thigh, make two points of cauterization, and in each point, make a cut at the end of the cauterization tool.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	When making the incision, follow the length of the thigh: and on one side, remove the denuded part and on the other side, make the incision in the middle of the thigh; and over each thigh, place two incisions.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And keep the wound clean for a long time because some pus may come out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And cure the wound with those causes that have been said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cauterization of abdominal parts.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal parts are affected by cold humors that cause the belly to become thin, it is the digestive and retentive vertutes that are affected, which are in the stomach and intestines, and should be cured with the help of medical attendants and not confined, and sometimes the abdomen suffers cauterization of the vertutes exposed, then make a large cauterization on the upper stomach according to the previous cauterization of the stomach, on the cauterization of the circle, and four cauterizations in the subtle circuit of the emblac, on the clavilh subtle; and make cauterizations over the alcatin on great aloys, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If the humors are excessive and the body tolerates it, then make incisions on the penis and intestines, and adjust two incisions on the stomach and lower abdomen, which is a perfect cure for the recovery of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol .xxxiv. is a Roman numeral that corresponds to the
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas. is a Latin phrase that translates to "Of the cauterization of anc
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When ancient gouty or fat humors or corrupt humors are found in nature, and they are cured as said in the division and not confirming the second cure, then make incisions on the spine of the two small and small triangular bones, and make cauterizations on the omentum pouch by two points.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient sometimes bleeds, then make incisions on the stomach with a large cauterization that is preceded; and a cauterization on the thigh, and another cauterization on the abdomen, and let the cauterization be cleaned for some time, and cure it when it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	From cauterization of the hernia, appropriate the abscess of it.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut a bone, you should use the cautery that is assembled in the ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place that cautery in the cut bone, and then insert the second piece, making sure it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you find any wounds or sores, then cauterize each of them the second time that they have been cleaned, and take care of those that are most affected by the burns as soon as they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize a large part of the skin with one cauterization, it is less effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capital.6.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of pistols that are found in nature, it is said in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, it is healed by cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone finds a pistol in nature that is old and corrupted by sain and humidity, and then it is right to say that the cover should be placed on that which is subtle, and approach the quantity of its depth in front of the mentioned tent.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	In this case, "aprop igneys" seems to be a typo or a word that doesn't exist in the language used in the treatise. However, "le
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then apply that lit cauter to this fistula, and according to the quantity needed to close it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	When you iterate over that area with the cautery, if those corrupted corpses are only slightly burned or two or three times, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And keep an eye on the combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or intestine, keep an eye on all those places; and do not touch it unless the fistula is in a place that is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And apply care to the area that has been cured.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the wound is sealed and all materials have been removed, and there are no signs for a long time, you know that it has been cured completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not of the patient's own, you know that they penetrate or in the pre-on of the body, they corrupt, or they cause this to happen for those causes that will be remembered in that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol Chapter xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the horn.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the horn there is pain from cold or great ventilation, and if the hand of the patient is sweating, you know that it should be cauterized over the horn with a pointed cautery on each horn with a clavicle that remembers.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	When it is necessary to make points on the second part of the body, then three lines of cauterization are made, and more points can be made in the future.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterization of the vagina.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When inflammation occurs in the vagina and it becomes soft and moist due to urine, then it is necessary to cauterize that part with a pointed cautery on the side of the vagina, starting from the vaginal opening, and then another cauterization is made on the opposite side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cauterization is according to the amount of urine; and it is cauterized at that point on the lower side of the vagina, or two cauterizations if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cauterization is made according to how it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the clitoris.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When inflammation occurs in the clitoris and it becomes soft and moist due to urine, and circumcision is prohibited, and the menstrual flow of the woman is corrupted, and the provocation of the women is delayed, and pain occurs in their region, then it is necessary to cauterize that part with three cauterizations around the umbilicus, as has been said in the cauterization of the vagina; and it is cauterized on the lower side of the two, or two cauterizations, and the clitoris is also cauterized.
Capitol .xl.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treat
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	ion, specifically about the treatment of a dislocated ankle (ankle) using cauterization. Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When humors become moist and infiltrate the joint of the ankle, and this causes pain in the surrounding area, and it is said that the thigh is extended over the other when compared to it.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the displacement becomes thin in that way.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	However, if you have to cauterize the thigh over the ankle of the patient using the pointed cautery, as it seems, you will have to be careful in the circle of the ankle where it revolves, and for that reason, the ankle falls into the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And this cauterization is the one that precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cauterization is not at your disposal, you can cauterize that with the large cauterizing olive.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the point of cauterization is according to the amount of the spleen's dissection; and it is cared for that one enters when it is healthy.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is felt in the knee joint, and its cause is cold humors, the thigh is treated with this, which has been called and not confined, and it is antiquated, and you must cut off the thigh from the gross humors that are either pills made of animal products or artificial pills or semblances; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The hand of the cauterization is followed by two hands: either a cauterization made with burning medicines, or a cauterization made with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Then follow two scientific hands: one of which is the one that cauterizes it over the knee joint, and the other three cauterizations are made in this form; and they make good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And if the space between each cauterization is the quantity of the grossness of the one and if the cauterization is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	There are some who see that the cauterization is over the middle of the head of the ankle for which there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize at the circle that is preceded by the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and which is a continuous and burning circle and cuts through the entire chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the manicure of cauterization in cases where pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend beyond the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If the wound is extended to the thigh, then make incisions on both sides of the thigh at the location where the evil will enter the body that causes pain; and make a cut on the cavity with four nails about a quarter of an inch long for the part that is most affected.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the incision is made with a scalpel, and the depth of the incision depends on the amount of spinal fluid.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the evil enters the body and the pain is extended to the location where it entered, then make incisions there with the scalpel, and if necessary, make three or four or more cuts on that part.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the evil causes pain to be felt further down the thigh, then make incisions there with the scalpel at the location where the pain is felt.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not use the scalpel as a nerve or large artery, and that for this reason you may cause the patient to have a bad outcome or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one and another of those which were cauterized on the cavity and later in the cauterization, and the bed was inflamed within which the tumor achieved the foot, and the focus was burned and corrupted throughout the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	When a sudden and severe pain in the stomach occurs, it may be a sign of impending death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts, and each part is cauterized on this manier, then...
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Different types of cauteries are used in this manier of cauterization: they resemble a circle of iron, the circumference of which is the largest part of a palm; and it is necessary to use the greatest force according to the size of a shoulder or a small bone.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The circle is then made another part; and the space between them is equal to the quantity of the notch of the point; and these circles are divided into two parts; and the length of those circles is a notch or two notches, and they are made in the points of iron decently; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	A fire is then placed in the furnace when it is closed and gives off sparks, and it is placed over the joint of the thigh, the leg covered with cloth.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And this cauterizes the point three times using a needle.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When the patient lies down for three days, applies the plaster to the affected area and covers it with a damp cloth every day, and takes care to keep it clean inside.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis: Oh, children, of this type of cauterization few have used out of fear of the observation of it, and because few have found those who observe over it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of the boils on the patient who suffers from them, and they disappear from that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More cauterization is used by doctors that you make two circles, not perforated in the one where the guzzle of the gate of iron is, whether the length of the legs in their youth is two noses or three fingers.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between the quantity of the growth of that is; and they are opened further and further, and they contain some between them in this form.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then stop over the part of the ankle where the patient suffers, and take your hand over the part of the ankle; and then draw water from the tail and pour it between two circles, and that quality of that is as small as possible, and take that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the pain in the mouth and throat — that pain disappears like fire — when the pain ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	When raising your hand with the instrument, avoid touching the entire wound with the pus.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Stretch it three times and place your hand on the border that is the remaining part of the adhesion, stretch it again for a few days, and run your fingers along the incision; this will improve with time.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Treat that area as soon as it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a statue of that part where pus is found, according to what is made in the wound closure.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the pus statue, and I have already written about this in the book on medical rectification.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and non-extinguishing caustic soda, and cut it into pieces and place them in a new wave, with the part left being perforated by a small tube, according to the amount that enters the ring.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then take the fountains of the other wave and place them over the live alkaline and caustic soda water, which requires two for each, and understand that those are for the tieua but for good compression, and stretch the hole that comes from the sharp water in the part left in the other wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust that water to that heat, and pour it over another part of the body, and another alkali is added, so that that pain subsides, which is maintained in operations of medicine and cauterization of other parts, which operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines are some that are cauterized wide, as it is with the essence and the meal of the acacia, and causes a hardness in some that are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Guy narrates of an old man who underwent that operation and cure, and magnifies the effect of that, and says that no other cure is needed, and that he was cured by a bath called Aqua Gualia, which is made with the essence and meal of the acacia, and knows the effect of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is near a certain herb, and if it is not dry, then it is held by the tail; and if it is cut into a few gray hairs, and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the chest, and it is observed.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When the pain is of three hours or the amount that the patient has lost due to the disease, it is necessary to relieve the pain.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then put the ointment on and when the body of the patient is wrapped, enter the ointment into the body, and the pain will cease and become healthy.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	You know that it is not necessary to use cauterization in these remedies except for the evacuation of the abdomen.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	I have already heard that when the vena stretica is cauterized with a goat's gut, it is more effective; and this is how the cauterization should be done according to this method: hold the lana with one hand and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And hold the dry and inflamed goat's gut between the foot and the wound, and place it on the lana and stretch it over the lana.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And continue this, and do not stop until the tingling sensation from the bite disappears in the ankle and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This manufacturing process for cauterization is called cauterization of quills.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol, Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization of joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is in the joint due to multiple causes such as inflammation or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for reasons similar to those, by infusion of wet and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization does not work only in this single case, but rather for the effusion of wet and humid matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, in case of excessive evacuation of the thighs, it is appropriate to use pills fitted to their shape and appearance, which are points on the foot where the pain is three lines along the latitude of the joint, and then cauterize or not, according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate and the virtue of the thigh.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it is a fact that cauterization is done with cauterization of points.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize by three or four cauterizations, or by the middle clavicle according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	I apologize, but I am unable to provide a translation for the source sentence 
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	From cauterization at the beginning of gilbositat.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	When swelling is present in the joints of the children's feet, and the beginning of this ailment is felt over their structure in the ankle and elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	When the lower back of the body begins to overarch, causing pain in the other vertebrae, it is called scoliosis.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	When you see this and want to stop it, then cut that part of the cautery that is circular in this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 and hold the cautery over the entire vertebra.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cut around the vertebra with the cautery of two or three points.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And treat the area that is healthy and has been said to be cured.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May you remember that cauterization should not be administered in inflammation that is caused by muscle spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And how is gout treated by cold humors with no relief of pain, and then cut the cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is necessary that you cauterize that nearby evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with the pointed cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And is this the form of the olive oil for cauterization?
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain pierces into the joints or other joints, and it moves to the surrounding areas, then you should cauterize that on each joint with three or four points of this olive oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If these cauterizations are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand, just to avoid damaging the specific area of the tendon.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain reaches the second joint, then apply the cauterization that was said in the capital.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is in the most part, and it is called sugar, then make points on the circumference of the joints as they revolve, make points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain remains in the following parts, then make points around the neck of the nail on each nail and on the tip of the toe.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain persists in the hips or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the helper's thighs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not remove the bad regimen and the reception of medicines, then if it is good regimen and flat it will be removed from this cauterization, may God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization of wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the wound is in the ankles and the intestines are coming out of the hernia into the abdomen, and then you should lay down the following: let the patient fast for one day, and use gentle remedies for so that the needle does not come out of the abdominal cavity.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient with your hands over the abdomen, and command the patient to hold the abdomen until it is flat or the hernia appears or the intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the thighs as you attempt to break through the bones of the femoral head and mark the end of which appears to be the circle of the gout in the subcutaneous parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Then enter when the point is rough and sharp.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then pause the cautery on that part, and if you have the drill with the pointed cautery, and enter when you can find the nut of the pentenilh inside the hinge; and do the same for another try if you haven't succeeded in the first try.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe wisely of the intestine during your cauterization, that you do not burn that intestine because it is located over the thigh and does not come out of death or other great misfortune.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you know that when you have the cautery, do not forget the bones, and your operation will not be successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	E if the cauterization of children is not done with great care according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And keep the area of the cauterization for three days, so that the burn of the fire is not too harsh.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And keep it for the other ingredients to enter when it is healthy.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their stomach for ten days after sealing the wound and applying plaster.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And be sure to reduce the nutrition according to the length of time the patient's cure takes, and the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to leave for three days, administer appropriate doses of medicine gently, and hold onto it for another three days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And the labor and diet of the patient, as well as the baths, should be moderate, and the treatments should be severe, when using this entire regimen of medicine, the patient will become healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you direct the cure of the ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and as at the beginning, and want that they do not come out, then cauterize the rupture with the same instrument according to its quantity, and it should be exhumed from the abdomen like the last part of the stomach; and keep the one that has been said and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	When the first injury has been treated, it is customary to cauterize the area with a triangular point following this form, as it is recommended.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And then another line is placed along the latitude in the latex, following the curve of the rupture, and another line at the end; and then a clavicle cauterization is made, which is better than the first one that was placed further away.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of the spine.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in any member due to inflammation or percussion and does not relieve for a long time and does not satisfy the doctor's treatment, it is necessary to cauterize with a point.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauterization of each member should be according to its magnitude and smallness, its veins and nerves, and the location of the spine and the pain in the member.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the patient is cured by the first cauterization, it is; and if not, you should repeat the cauterization over it; four out of five of those pains are punctures from one member to another, for which you must cover that you can achieve them after the member has been cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a
De cauterizacio de lepra.	De cauterizacio de lepra. This line translates to "Of cauterization of lepro
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, and less so for the specific leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of flax and melancholy. This line translates to "Some boils are treated with cauterization due to great benefit, but less so for the specific leprosy caused by the putrefaction of flax and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	When you want to cauterize that part, consider if leprosy is present and if it has been cured as they have said in the division and not here, nor there, and fear for the thighs that corruption understands the entire body of him and all the composition of him, then cauterize that over the head with a point: one in the middle of the forehead, and one further down from there, and press it towards the tip of the nose; and two on the temples or servants.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, the last thing you should do is that the cauterization is made a little further in the bone when it begins to press on the gout, and the legs are displaced, because the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize over the table second that is required.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already expanded over the thighs and manifestly appears, then you should cover that it is cauterized as those have been said in the head; and cauterize over the tip of the nose, and two on the temples or servants, and two on the collarbones, and two on the spine, and one over the spine of the back, and one over the chest, and one over the shoulders, and one over each shoulder blade, and one over each elbow, and one over each wrist, and one over each tendon, and one over every muscle, and two over each joint of the thighs and feet, and on every toe of the feet, and on every finger of the hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	When you guard the nerves that are over the sole that does not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery over the bones of the patella and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the thigh.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the fewer points are cauterized, the less beneficial and less effective; and you know that the thigh does not cause pain in the cauterization, do it as they have them, so that the body of the patient has already been stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the points are large or few according to the members and joints according to which they are preceded by the species of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And properly care for the cauterization with flour of errors cut with wax and the other cure when it is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization for stupefaction.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stunned or falls asleep and is treated by medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not become healthy, then you should cauterize that stunned member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When the hot iron is inserted into the body's wound a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area as soon as it becomes healthy.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Some veins are cauterized with a certain stupor that ends in the more or less feet, and in the vertebrae of both sides, and one sees the excitement of the nerves which move that member, and it is reinforced with stupor.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	This should not be pressed on except for that which is known about the anatomy of the member and the exit of the nerves that move the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization of boils that become gangrenous.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When boils are old and do not respond to the treatment of medicine, then you should cauterize over that area with a certain stupor. Afterwards, cut a small piece of the body's wound and see if the white and color of the boil change. The color of the boil will change.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And treat that area with flour and lentils of red olive and leaves of arnica, and a piece of saffron or a piece of iron, each part is a piece and all are mixed, and place a cloth over it and hold it in place until it becomes healthy.
Capitol .l.	The first line "Capitol .l." is not in a
De cauterizacio de cranc.	De cauterizacio de cranc" translates to "Of the cauterization of the
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut" translates to "When cancer begins and you want that part, you cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the circle of the skin where it rolls.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas" translates to "And I have seen that the part that was cauterized with the pointed cautery in the local area is not visible, but there are fears that it may be ulcerated, and I have already seen some wounds.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris" translates to "And it is better that the part is cauterized in the circle of the skin where we have said, or at the end of the cauterization.
Capitol .li.	The line "Capitol .li." is not in English and
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	De cauterizacio de adubilati" translates to "Of the cauterization of adulter
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some dough is slow in maturation, and this happens due to the excess of ingredients or because the meat is old, dry, or due to time, and you want to speed up the maturation of the dough; then cauterize around that part with a small point of cautery; and let it rest until it matures.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a hole in the dough with cautery, then you should know the type of cautery that this is and slowly advance it into the dough once it penetrates the casing.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is placed in that place where it was put out, because the arm of the bracelet is swollen; and take care of that after it becomes normal.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cauterization of corrosions.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrosion is an ambulating corruption in the member that consumes it like fire eats dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you sometimes make the corrosion burn in that place where it suffered cauterization like fire, then you should know that you use small cautery points and large ones according to the place where the corrosions are.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	When it comes to completely cauterizing that part within which the inflammation has spread and does not cause any harm to him.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	After three days, it is advisable to pause over the cauterized areas for a short time, taking oil mixed with herbs that completely eradicates all wounds and corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And treat that part with an ointment that stops the growth of flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If the flesh rises three times in the area where there is no corruption, then it is done; otherwise, continue to cauterize over the area that is rotting in the affected areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And if they are rotten, some medical herbs can be applied to the affected area, as that is the place for cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization should not be done too often, as it may cause harm.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment of the patient's acute medicine in division, and then take that when the disease arises.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of claws and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Wounds are often found in the parts of the foot that have been clawed, and they are large, deep, and cause pain to the foot; and cauterization is done on those parts with two hands, either with fire or with a hot knife.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	When a cauterizing iron is hot, it should be heated similarly to the heat of a forge, which is made of iron according to the amount that contains the key of all parts, and is of thin strips.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then stop the heat on the key, and rotate your hand over the cauterizing iron while it passes through the key until the cauterizing iron reaches the depth of the key.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it remain for three days after it begins to blister.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And apply the plaster with honey-soaked salves, and let it remain on that for a day or two, until that is completely removed from its surfaces.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And cure the wound with flesh generated after it is healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and visible ulcers appear on the surface of the body, mainly on the thighs and feet, then you must administer care in those cauteries that you have heated, and take a piece of iron or copper or fire-red iron, and place it over the key; and let it drip a little water into the key, and hold your hand over it, and you rotate the cauterizing iron around the compression of your hand, and press the edge of the key against the opening of the wound, and draw out the water from the preen of the wound to the opening of the claw; and wait for a while the bite of the water from the claw on the opening of the wound for an hour, and then remove it, so that the claw has its teeth completely removed from its surfaces.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	When you have found the right spot, insert your hand into it and push the other parts in as well, so that all of them are inside the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And take care to remove those thorns that cause pain, as the flesh of the claws grows over them.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitulum Tertium.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of Cautery for Trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When trembling is caused by cold humors in the nerves or by fever of that nature, or by some other cause resembling it, you should know that you must cauterize that part with four or five caustics or on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a caustic; and on the stomach of the patient, and over the intestine, you should cauterize with olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient is cured and the health of the feverish state is restored quickly.
Capitol .lv.	Capitulum Quartum.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of Cautery for Accidents to the Chest.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the chest is inflamed and has pustules that are caused by fatty materials that have become corrupt; then, at the beginning, as it appears, that part should be cauterized over the entire opening with a subtle caustic or a burning point, the extremity of which is extended to the focus, or to long-standing erestology, or with a slow cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	When certain veins are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and it is not surprising, and the superfluity is broken, making those healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	When I say that this is not an accurate translation, it means that the provided text is not a proper translation of the original medieval medical treatise. The translated text does not accurately convey the meaning of the original text.
Capitol lvi.	Capitulum lv. This is Latin for "Chapter 5
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	De cauterizazione dei flussi di sangue accidentali causati dall'incisione dell'arto. This is Italian for "About the treatment of accidental blood flows caused by an
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troppe vaghe gocce di sangue che uscivano dall'arto richiedono un trattamento immediato. Questo può essere fatto con una puntella di cautera, o con l'incisione di apostemi, o con il cauterizzo del membro, e poi il tiro dell'altra parte della cautera per rimuovere la sanguignità. Tuttavia, questo metodo può essere difficile da eseguire e potrebbe causare ulteriori lesioni. This is Italian for "Too many drops of blood that come
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Quando qualcosa di sbagliato accade, dovresti cautelare la parte coinvolta per prevenire ulteriori danni. In questo caso, dovresti costringere l'arteria con una puntella di cautera, e rimase in attesa che le vaghe gocce di sangue si esaudiscano. Una volta che la sanguignità è stata controllata, dovresti tirare l'arteria alla sua posizione originale e assicurarti che non c'è ancora sangue uscendo. This is Italian for "When something goes wrong, you should take precautions to prevent further damage. In this case, you should clamp the
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then pause in the fire a few and large cautery sticks, by name, and blow over those that are not yet ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take from those a small or a large piece of cloth and place it in the location and press on the one that has ruptured the artery, over which firmly push the said cauterizing iron until it is absorbed and held by the mentioned sand.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the sand expels from the orifice of the artery when you still hold the said one and remove the cauterizing iron, then take another cauterizing iron quickly from those that are prepared in the fire, and so continue to do this until the sand is held.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And keep in mind that you will not burn the nerves that are here, and that another mischief will come over the thigh.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you know that when the artery flows from the sand, you cannot hold it in the tightened sand, and especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four hands: by cauterizing as said has been done, or by extracting when not extracted, four when extracted are burned and held back by the sand, or that is lit by a faithful or a loyal person, or that are pressed over the medicines of those that restrict the sand; and they are tightened by the pulsion of the constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	This sentence seems to be discussing the administration of appropriate care for a patient with restricted movement in their limbs or chest, caused by various conditions such as tight clothing, physical injuries, or other causes. The text suggests that proper care is essential for comfort and well-being.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If there is no doctor or physician present and you must perform the operation yourself, then open the incision on the vein as they have said, and understand the great difficulty of entering that part of the body which has not been affected by the plague, and over the artery the point is not harmed; and over the artery, apply a sharp piece of wet frog to the great coldness that is in that part of the body which has been sewn up and filled out; and do not worry about whether it needs cauterization or medical attention.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Continue with the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and ventosias and of fleebotomy and of the plague and its like.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are phrases from Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	As has been said in the first book of all diseases in which cauterization is convenient and useful, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments required for it, and I have arranged the chapters of the subincision of the head within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	When you process in this capital for that purpose, so that the patient may be happy with it, and you over it what will be asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And since you began thusly, son, son in law, that in this capital it is for fear of the patient that there is more cauterization in the first capital.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that reason, son in law, that there is great caution in the operation, which is done in this capital, it is necessary to evacuate what is seen in the vein or by incision over the aposteme or apex of exit or purification of the plague or extraction of the catarrh or incision of urine and its appearance.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all that is accompanied by fear and trembling and in the most of them the death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And you advise you that over you do not fall in the which is the situation, because some see that you must have men who are men and motas of diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is known that if you go to their disease and they see that you must have their death, and so because of the vehemence of this which finds in their disease, and because of the long time of the disease of them, and they see that the disease means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	When those are the things that give you an idea and tell you what to expect, you should expect that the wound is serious and the misfortune of the patient is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And do not assume that you agree with the one who shows you this maneuver; and your caution should be greater than expected and your greed; and do not presume any cause other than certain science, which confirms to you this, and by succession, praiseworthy.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your diseases for prognosis and indication of the one that is converted to health, which is an aid to you in the acquisition of fame and memory, praiseworthy and glorious.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, may God help you in understanding and not leave you without direction and protection, for this is in your hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you ordered this chapter to be distinguished by the following chapters that precede it in the chapter of cauterizations, of the care of the head entering the feet, so that you may be able to find what you asked for and of which there is a need.
Capitol primier.	The first source sentence is in Latin and can be translated as 
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	De la curacio de aygua" means "of the treatment of urine," and "la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz" means "which is contained in the head of the children." So,
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat" means "You should know that this child's disease is caused by the lack of milk and when the nurse stretches the child's head, the life force is squeezed out." So,
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda" means "And some are caused by the lack of moisture, which is not cleaned." So,
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels" means "I have not seen this disease in children only; and in all those that I saw were threatened with death, and therefore I saw some work done in them." So,
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort" means "And I saw that the child's head was full of urine, and the child's head was totally dry, and he could not put anything on it because the greatness of the child's head did not allow it, and less so when the fire burned." So,
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This humidity or is added between the ribs and the bone, or is added further on the bones over the chest.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	The first source sentence to translate is: "Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am une fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If humidity increases and the abscess grows, then there are two incisions to make according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity reaches the skull, then you should see the commissures of the bare cap and the water is seeping when you press on it with your hand, but not at the parts of the fingers that are most sensitive to you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	This means that you should cut in the corner of the head with three incisions according to this method.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	This means that you should cut through the entire head with three incisions, then stretch the fissures with cloth and plaster, and apply a bandage over it and let it stay for five days, and clean the wound and sew the skin together, and tighten the cap to equality; and feed the patient with dry food within that limb that is comfortable and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	This means that there is another method of incision, which is considered the best in terms of the size of the hematoma and the collection of fluid, as some veins may be less visible in the occipital region, or on the side, or on the left, or on the right; and therefore, pay attention to the incision where the hematoma and the repletion of fluid are located, and follow what is best for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	This means that do not cut the artery and avoid causing bleeding, and do not make the patient wait for the discharge of the waste from the wound due to that flow of waste.
Capitol .ii.	1. "Capitol .ii." translates to "Chapter
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	1. "De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse" translates to "Regarding the incision of the arteries that are closest to the aorta, called hilases.
Capitol segon.	1. "Capitol segon" translates to "Chapter
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	1. "Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias" translates to "When the patient is treated with cold applications or poultices on the limbs or chest, and this is not enough, and no cure is found in this, then the following cure should be given to these two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	1. "E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes" translates to "And when you want to incise the parts that the patient wants to remove, and make the incision as deep as possible in the area where the arteries are located, and consider where the vein is; and the locations of each over the locations where the aorta pulses, and they are so hidden that they only appear in a few men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And place your hand over the artery at the point of injection, and insert the needle into every part of the joint affected by gout, and it should be located near the head of the foot.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, enter the needle through the skin and push it towards that part of the artery.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the insertion is two to three times that of the needle, then when a vein is inserted, it should exit through pulsation and the thread should be visible, which will fracture due to frequent pulsation.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear at the injection site, you should measure the circumference of the thigh and determine the quantity of three inches, and then place your hand on the point, and it should enter the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that the thread is pulled tight by the amount of one inch, and not too much or too little, and then it should be according to the quantity that appears on the thigh and the replenishment of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And if you consider the pain, and then if there is any cause for the wound to come out of the bone, you should insert it in that way so as not to cause an incision.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When the swelling is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the skin and clothing, and it is necessary to care for it, do so within the area that is affected.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol .iii. is not a complete sentence and does not
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of extracting the arteries that are in the templates.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When the veins or arteries of ancient clothing are damaged by cold humors and impurities in the scales of the templates, or the old skin becomes very inflamed and resembles those, and is treated with the curative manieyras of medicinal medicine, but it does not help, we have found these maladies to be extractions of arteries from the templates, or cauterization of those parts that have been shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manieyra of the operation and extraction of those is what causes the malady to race through the parts that are in the templates; and understand that the apparent artery in the template that you have shown with your hands, and is hidden except in a few people by the vehemence of freg.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, the col of the malady may be strengthened by some clothing; and place freg on the location where there is a dry or evaporated drap, or water cauda entro that appears to you the artery manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	When you take the gout, this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And when you scorch the joint, this is the method: and when you get out of that, get it out through the arch; and when you get it out, get it out through the part where you extracted it, and discover the parts of those that are left in that place, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is fine, wrap it around the end of the cord, and cut off a piece according to the number of those that are connected at the ends of the cord and are contracted, and do not let any fluid flow out, for if they are not cut, they will not be able to pull out the whole.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove three drops of sweat from the body.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, you should cover that with two pieces of cloth or strings as far apart as possible to prevent putrefaction during the consolidation of the plague and prevent fluid from flowing out.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut off the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, cauterize that point with the pointed cautery within the bone that has incised extramittats of it, and stay in place of that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient does not have fever or is not in sepsis; then cauterize those causes that help to dry the wetter ones, and therefore it is better for the cure.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the archways that hump the space of the old crotch, and are placed over the clean parts nicely, and as soon as possible apply the care of medicines to make the flesh and skin better within which is healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while you work another vein flows out of the archway, you must hold that sac with your hand or a pointed cautery, or place it on the old crotch and tighten it within which is dry the sac, and hold it well.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If you do not have the cause of those things at your present, then place your hand on the side of the location where the sac is dry, and wrap the location with something wet to prevent it from being cold, and hold it strongly so that it covers.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	When one is pushed into extracation of an artery, it is necessary to cauterize the vein at this cauterization with two points, so that you have seen the two locations, and then pause, not much, until they come to the bone and incut the vein in two locations, so that it is elongated as much as possible between the extremities of this, so that it is not supported by all of this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of cauterization:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by do
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the pain is more severe in one joint than the other, then it is likely to be gout. If the pain is sudden and intense, and quickly spreads to the surrounding tissue, it may be a sign of gout.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, if there is any swelling in the joints, the heat of the fire should be reduced and the skin should be gently peeled off.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and has more detail.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	However, the space between the two joints is not always an indicator of the severity of the pain.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Regarding the treatment of sudden and severe gout attacks in the feet caused by acidic uric acid crystals.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When gout attacks are present and the feet swell due to inflammation of the veins over the thigh bone, and no cause for its cure can be found in medical science, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes pale and moves as if it were the front of a spider's web, and the toes become extenuated, humid, but the nails are still hard, the tears of the eyes become red due to inflammation, the old sweat is aggravated in the treatment of this operation, and many mistakes are made in the cure of this operation.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	It is necessary that you command the patient to raise their knees, and then insert your three fingers three centimeters apart along the length of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the fissure is two inches, then the first fissure should be two inches distant from the longitud of the nose in the middle of the front, and the second should be a little further along the movement of the wrists that are in the lacrimal, and the third part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep in mind the beginning of the arcets that are in two rows, and extend your hand for the continuation of the bones of the jaw.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If the space of each insertion is three inches adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have a sponge pillow or sheet that absorbs moisture, use it to dry the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And place the sponge between two sharp edges, of which this is the form of the insertion of the wound:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	 that is from the beginning of the template to the second insertion.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Exfoliate all the skin that is between two incisions and the one that is over the bone, and then make sure that the insertion moves into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And if it is necessary to enter this substance and go into the first incision of another woman's body with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and smooth on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And stop the fat of that sharp instrument with the cartilage, and the edge of the leon's tooth with the bones, and press that goes into the fissure to migrate, and cut off all those vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May it be continued of the incision to that part of the cartilage, and place it in the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And push that quantity of liquid out, remove the locations of the sac's pits.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And stop in any fissure that has a thick hair, and stay over those powders enbegotten with oil and vinegar, and see that it does not cause an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day remove the ligament and give a large infusion of water or blood, and care for that it is cured with balsam and oil rose and others which are the plagues are healed.
Capitol .v.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	This line seems to be discussing the treatment of gout (lagramas) and its symptoms, specifically the pain and swelling that occurs in the feet (huels). The term "dedintz" might refer to the joints or bones in the feet. Here's a possible translation:
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the joints become inflamed with gout and continue to swell, and the feet become slightly thin, and the eyes are affected by the pain, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the hair is damaged on the head, and in the crown of the head there is acute pain and inflammation due to the accidents that the materials and gout do not come from the veins of the joints but from the parts of the bones.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for this condition is to command the patient to face away from you, and then insert your hand into the opening of their front, creating a small incision in the middle of their forehead (and starting at the medial side of the right temple; and extend into the bone; and enlarge the space between the tendons of the muscles that are not visible through the fissure), once you have reached the bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry the entire area with a sponge or cloth, and then fill the gap between the two sides of the incision with cotton or strips of cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply some powder to absorb moisture and prevent the cautery from sticking to the skin.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the cautery has diminished, take care to remove the powder from the bone that starts at the middle of the fissure, and apply a poultice made from wheat flour, four parts of colloquium, and mescla o, and apply it to these plagues on the skin of the native tissue.
Capitol .vi.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text "Capit
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas" translates to "The cure of this gout that is in the joints.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia." translates to "The total cause that gout is in the joints is one of four species, which is either mineral pebble or causes a similar appearance to a pebble, like iron and steel, or is of plant origin like nettle or fennel, or is a cause of fluxing like water and vinegar, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio." translates to "Then if pebble gout is in the joint or another similar cause does not fit or is not believed in the joint, and stops the joint to the sun, and if it sometimes shows the pebble, distillation is done on that one of those causes of oil violat or sizami, and properly administers the extraction of the same, and makes it run amend, and oppilates the patients for the outcome of the running.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then pause at the circuit of the auricle of some buttons or linen, and extend the auricle to the parts thereof, where four points are usually forgotten in these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not obtained, you administer an extraction from the body with the instrument called the epigastric gauge of this type:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten, then so be it; and if not, you administer the extraction of the body with a small subtle amount of duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not forgotten for this, you make a cannula of aram and enter the extremity of the cannula into the opening of the auricle and close the end of the cannula with wax and ointment softened so that the cannula is not scratched except for the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract from the upper part of the wind that is too much attracted, where too many points have been obtained.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not forgotten in this method, you hold the hair or wool of the patient with your hand, and press the parts of the body with one hand a certain quantity, and then place that on the extremity of the ear, and gently fold over the part.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	When entering that part of the ear with ease, and removing the moisture from it.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if you do not forget all the causes that have been mentioned, then make points on that line where it becomes difficult to apply cautery or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manicure of that is what you should start by cutting the vein of the inferior saphenal egress and then according to the virtue of your hand, and place that cezer between your hands and convert the ear into parts, and a small fissure in the tip of the ear you must let out the blood in the place that is most pregnant with it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fissure of the lunar figure appears when it passes over the foot, and the foot is wasted, remove that part as much as you can using appropriate instruments; and at that time, take care of that with speed, and cure that which is in that place.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the ear is one of the greasy ones that you have seen and are inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your advice, then you should take your subtle substance according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	When administering care to that person's abscess, apply the remedy to that wound which is located in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	If you do not apply it when you think that the patient has already been hydrated by the steam of the ear, and pause there for a while, and then extract from those with care, or with your fingers, or with a needle in the place where they were, then the extraction of the fluid will be easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that is inserted into the ear, which the patient uses for nasal congestion, and fills the ear canal with a piece of cloth, and places it over the ear where the water is, and if for any reason it is forgotten, then so be it; and if not, you must take several peyrings and leons according to the length of the case, and heat them in the fire for a moment, and the patient inserts one of those into the opening of the ear and places it on the other side of that part and presses it with another peyring over the peyring that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Thus, do not cease to apply this remedy as soon as the entire body is flooded with urine.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And if the urine has flooded the entire body as soon as you take paper or gauze and, place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to touch the forehead when it is burning from the urine.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if you apply and another piece of gauze and keep doing this as many times as the urine has flooded the entire body, and stretch that to the canal where it is said that the extra stone comes from.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of the beast that has entered into that ear, if it is small, it is easy and looks like a little animal, treat that as they have said in the division; but if it is of great size, the cause appears at the end of the event, maintain the extraction of the amniotic fluid and onchises, and the cause of it is pushed aside from all other causes that are found in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of the worm generated in the ear, when you treat that amniotic fluid as they have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not confirm your curacy, then you should cover the ear with the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If here any cause of the gallstones is found, take out that one with a gentle grasp or with one's fingers, but if no such cause is found, then take a needle and thread it through the hole, and this is the form of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Enter the extremity gently into the anus according to the amount of pain it suffers from the gallbladder; and then apply force with your hand, and make a few turns, entering if all the gallstones are small.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not follow my instructions, then take out the needle and close it in the circuit of the canula as has been said; administer distillations of those that have already spread the ants in the treatment of gallstones, and you will find it in the section of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And is your discharge that which you pour the medicines into the anus with this instrument, of which this is the form of it:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make that of silver or of gold, straight, in which there will be a small hole, and insert it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	When you are in the cavity of the uterus, as is necessary here, then do so.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you want, take the needle and wrap it at the end of the uterus gently, and insert it into the concave part of the ear, or any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the canula — and that is in the ear —, and insert the needle through the tip of the ear and compress the tube with your hand until the oil is expelled from the concave part of the ear and the uterus feels the oil on it.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And if you wrap it in the ear, it is already scalded by a little fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And keep in mind that the cause that you will distill in the ear is not too cheap, for the ears' medicines do not suffer from this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of ophthalmia of the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children have had ophthalmia in the bellies of their mothers who were not perforated, and this has already happened in some men's eyes, ophthalmia in the meat of the ear due to plague or nothing in it; and this ophthalmia is seen in the preservation of the ear's wound that does not see the evening, and some are seen in the deformed parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	When an injury occurs in the body part that does not understand the will, it is in the most difficult treatment conditions.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you have achieved the desired effect, make sure that your hand is placed on the patient's ankle and look in that direction.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If you notice swelling, open this soft sponge that is the form of this:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where there is little latitude, the form of which one part is sharp and the other not; and the sponge is of two leathers per so that it does not hurt the ankle.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if swelling appears in the flesh or in the meat of the foot, use those soft sponges and press firmly until it is completely inside.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if swelling is in the front of the ankle, use a soft leather and heat that sponge slightly, and then put it in the meat of the ankle.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you feel swelling in it that the foot becomes difficult to move, due to fatigue, try to increase the pressure on it and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ankle.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	1. And then pause in the second layer of the second cloth of the following quantity of thread that you have wrapped around the Egyptian oil; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or if you take any and dip it in water and powder it over the affected area according to your preference and use it; and if at some point the aurelha has already been stretched, then make sure that the cloth you took is not damaged and swap it with another one of the same type that you wrap around the cerot that is meant to be red, if it is the case of the stretch; and then care for this inside to make it healthy.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If you have diarrhea of the stomach, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the abdomen, and use another cure that restricts the flow of the stomach, which is called in the distillation book.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the cure of puffiness that happens to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Puffiness happens to the eyelids that is caused by some humors, and some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, if you have those sharp points or spikes, and cut them off at the ends of those tendons, and place them on the wound according to its size.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If the pain is in the flow of venous blood, then you should cauterize those points with a fine cautery under the skin.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the cuts and wounds return to their original shape when they are returned to the same cause of the tendons; and when the points are burned, those tendons become charred and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 6.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for giant cell that goes to the eyes of the horses.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Wounds that appear in the eyes of the horses are caused by an unknown reason that is related to the giant's strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an addition of thick moisture in the eyes on both sides.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is that you should consider that the giant is proceeding from the water that appears in the eye and is bad for all parts; and the cause of it is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, if there is any swelling in that area due to cold, and it is easily accessible within the foot, then suspend it from one part and cut it off at another.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you do not see the beginning of the wound, and it is not possible to penetrate the eyelid with your finger, then you will not be able to notice it in this case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and care for it after it has healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer from that, because the anguished part of the restored and reformed skin will heal.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is descending towards the parts of the eyelid, you must smooth the surface of the eyelid, then suspend the swelling at one part, another as you instruct for the incision, and press it to the whole part, and if the eyelid is elongated due to the incision, then you will not notice it in this case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the location of that part which is healing after it has been healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.x. - This phrase does not appear to be
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel." translates to "The cure for the black spot in the eyelid of the hazel
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels." translates to "Gray spots are the result of what is generated in the layers of the eyelid, especially in children, they worsen the color of those and cause discomfort in their eyes; and they cannot see the clarity of the sun because of that.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	When you see those eyes often on the same parts, and when they sleep; and so on their eyelids, which have already covered inflammation and imminence of an apparent ulcer in the wound; and if you find that you are entering them with your finger, then count how many you enter.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	A certain maneuver is in that which the thigh pauses the head from the side it wants to be on, and a pause of the leg and the foot causes cramp, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains the articular heads of all parts, and place it over it and press on the eyelids with all the force you can so that there is an additional ulceration in the margin of the circle, and then in the margin of the humidity that hits the incidence in the fissure of the fissure that is made in flaubotomy, and the fissure is not greater than the fissure that is made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the preliminary operation that you pass the gut entirely within which you encounter inflammation, and in the less processed cases of inflammation it is processed through ulceration according to the form of white grayish.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that which is inside the clothes that you have torn between the two thighs and roll it up from the right to the left side, after which it should be separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And keep in mind that you should not adjust yourself in the fissure for if the excrement does not reach the hole and the surrounding parts will be dirty.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	However, if you do not see your anus at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust yourself in the fissure with a small ease as you process; and extract that which has been said; and submerge the clothes in water and wash them and place them over the area and stretch out those am polvils.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so those who take salt and place that in the cavity of the fissure because there is some moisture left.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And after that, treat that when it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	However, if you have an accident in the location of the plaster, then treat that by applying emplastres cedatils when it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. This is a Roman numeral, which corresponds to
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	The first line of the text is "De manieyras de tactimi del huel." This phrase can be translated as 
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the hulls are naturally raised and aged, and if there are any signs of illness, it is necessary to treat them with manicures of the hulls. There are four ways to do this: either with cauterization, or with medical acupuncture as it is said in the capital of cauterization; or with atactic incisions and sutures; or with cannulas as you direct.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	The first source sentence to translate is: "E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	When the corner of the eyelid is injured and the sharp end of the lacrimal bone pierces the lacrimal pit; and then extract the fiel and place your finger on the corner of the eyelid, and cover it with a thin piece of cloth or drap, and press it against the eyelid, and it will look like a small blade of grass.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, I believe that the figure is different according to the amount of eyelid elevation, for it is already diversified among men, and some of those require that a certain quantity be cut into the eyelid according to the degree to which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And if you have placed the spatula on the two lines that you have marked, and begin at the lacrimal major with the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is close to the natural pits of the eyes, it looks like the largest of the king's royal palaces.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the onion at one of the two angles of the noose, and cut it all, and adjust it to the mouth of the gullet or the fine lynch, and remove the sinew, and make it adhere if there are superfluous strings over two cords for some reasons, if you want to do that, and if not, do not worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And properly close the incision of the testicles within three or four days, and properly care for it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, close the suture properly, and keep it moist with what dries and constricts the eyelid, as soon as the eyelid is red, use the seal of the plague and its addition; better to make fewer sutures and thus save time.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, there is concern about the thigh, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another mantra for dressing, and you see about the eyelid as if it were a piece of mortar, and then raise the eyelid three times in this manner:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is not possible to do this, take the uncini, and do not tear them, then take a nail in the one that has the thread and put it in the mast of the figure, and enter the other testicle through the larger lacrimal, and the other through the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between the two sides of the testicles as equal as possible, and raise the rest of the chain over the one that is placed as if it were a piece of mortar.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And accordingly adjust the edges of the plague's mouth with a suture, and care for that which is inside that it may be healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you happen to have an abscess, either your stitch or your wound, clean the abscess with soap and water, and rinse it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some crusts appear on the eyelid that its parts have been converted, then know that you use in that place what they have said about the suture; less suture is needed where it is not artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To clean the canals is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And is that you convert the eyelid and cut the figure that follows according to what I have found; and accordingly for art make canals or subtle stitches of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width is according to the width of the spatum.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And if you have already sutured at the ends of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And add to each of the subtleities that are superfluous on the eyelid of the hazel, and tighten the canals of some parts with a strong pressure, and lay it aside for later use, where the coda for the pressure is destroyed and becomes disqualified and turns inside when it is inserted into the cavity.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is late, then cut the cloth as soon as possible, and properly care for the wound that has been infected.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Once closed, the eyelid is raised and the eyebrows do not pull.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to cut warts that you will follow in this way:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 and the length and width are neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the eyebrow is hard, the wart can be cut off with a sharp knife.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the eyebrows are not natural, hard and sharp and prickly, the operation is done by you who takes a sharp knife and places it on that soft and slight part of the neck that is slightly sloping and slightly leonine, and makes sure that you adjust the ends of the warts and the noses without being too subtle.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the soft parts is about a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And you may put another small soft part further on, and clean the ends of that if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	When the patient is lying down, place the uterus in the upper part of the abdomen, and it will be easier for you to perform your work, as this operation is delicate and small.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And introduce the needle into the eye of the pelvis that requires an anchor, and make it penetrate deeply into the eyelid as soon as it exits the natural pelvis.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And pull the pelvis inside the eyelid and insert the other into the joint, and there should be one or two, not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And pull your hand out that the pelvis is outside the eyelid and inserted into the joint, and it should be in the natural pelvis.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If you are not pulling the joint and the pelvis is not outside, pull the joint to the parts that follow after the wound you have made, as soon as it is outside the joint of the part that you have cut.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And see that which you have made with the eye of the wound, and if you pull the joint and the part, and cut it and close the wound, and leave it for two or three days, until the pelvis adheres to the place and covers over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the penis is short, you should adjust it to a long natural penis and raise it, or it will enter that space improperly, and you should then lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a medical term or phrase, but without additional context, I am unable to provide an
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a medical term or phrase, but without additional context, I am unable to provide an accurate translation. If you could provide more information or context, I would be happy to help.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a medical term or phrase, but without additional context, I am unable to provide an accurate translation. If you could provide more information or context, I would be happy to help.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a medical term or phrase, but without additional context, I am unable to provide an accurate translation. If you could provide more information or context, I would be happy to help.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a medical term or phrase, but without additional context, I am unable to provide an accurate translation. If you could provide more information or context, I would be happy to help.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasury of your cure is that you pierce as many bones as are not solid according to the form that follows the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation which they have said is none other than a correction of healing that does not return the form of the place according to what was at the beginning.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 34.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of eczema which is made in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This eczema which is made in the eyelid, which is truly called eczema; and it is of two kinds, one natural and the other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The more accidental one is made by plague or by a cut or by cauterization or by other such means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation of the eczema is that you take a loop and make it double, and fix it on the flesh, and let it pass from the inner corner of the eye to the outer corner of the eye, passing through those two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And extend the flesh to the parts where the loop is and cut it at that place, and incise into the moistened fat.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	If the figure of the eyelid returns to its original position, and if not, take the mirror and hold it in front of that part, and with that convert the eyelid, and you will see the fissures in the eyelid's edge.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	If the extremities of the fissures of two angles of the incision are turned inward, and if one of them is turned inward when they come together, and the figure of the other angle is turned inward when they gather together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek: the letter Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And if you take the flesh of that part according to the amount that is left of the nail, then it will be the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And if you adjust the separated parts and sew them together with that thread; and if you cure those that have been told of the softening medicines and the blisters that are inside when they are healthy.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you operate through a fissure or suture or cauterization, you must know that you are making a flat cut on the eyelid's edge according to what is preceded.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And separate the calf from the two lips as they have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon of the cure of alxmaxatans when they are cut or removed, which runs in this operation, subsequent to being prepared by the form of alxmaxatans, and it is in the shape of various waves.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artificer saves all times prepares engen in each hand that is possible for it to return the figure to its natural or previous form, or rather of that, and this one then according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the larger dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitulum .xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in some men who have the eyelid firmly attached to the album of the cheek, and is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural works, therefore it is recommended that you enter the extraction of the ray from the eyelid, and raise it therein, or extend it to the other side.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And if you insert the adhesion to a subtle sputum, which is not of sharpness of the incisions, having obtuse a little so that this malleus is not worried about the operation, and remain the sputum that does not affect the hazelnut in its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	When you have removed the excess moisture from the area, return the eyelid back to its natural form and ensure that the adhesion is completely cured.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then, add saltwater to the wound; or, distill water in the sun and dissolve it in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the wound, and place your hand over the wound, infusing albumin into it, and use the third day for consolidating causes within which it is cured.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the incision of the eyebrow and the removal of the skin of the eyelids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that the eyebrow is made of two layers, one nervous and one non-nervous, resembling a firm, subtle substance; or it is non-nervous, resembling white, wet humor, which when touched, or attempted to be taken with the finger, is cut off and the finger does not stick in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And if you eat the specials only from the larger tear duct, it will gradually cover the eye and prohibit light and movement of the wound.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	When the worker's hand is in the scar of the patient's thigh, and the thigh pauses the need to be covered in the upper part, and works the hairs of the thigh, and raises the eyelid to your eye, and approximately collides the ungla am onci of a few duplication and extends it to those parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take an agula and enter it into that un pel of a horse or buou or vaqua, or semblance, or feather, or double the extremity of the agula little by little and place it in the middle of the ungla, and penetrate it into the agula, and hold the ungla with your finger; and extend it to those parts, and cleanse it at the lap of the pel the latz of the ungla which touches the pupilla.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And do you follow that with the agula into the lower part of the pel.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And you insert the romanent into the edge of the lacrimal am spatum subtle or petitas forfexs, and cut the flesh of the lacrimal natural because if it is inserted in that way, continuous fluxes of watery sacs will occur.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	When someone asks if you can see the skin on the extended or contracted part of the body, and they say that this is the form of the leopard, then it is said that this is the form of the leopard.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	E se tu touches la tunica cornea o la pupilla, entens que estàs violentando el sistema visual del paciente, i estais causando daño a su visión.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	If the incision is not properly dressed with a few drops of sal or a piece of cloth soaked in cold water, and it is allowed to enter another day, then it should be treated promptly to prevent further damage.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the wound is not nerve-ending and you cannot insert the needle or it is not located in that area, then this type of wound is treated by a physician and is cured according to the prescription provided in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to make an incision in that area, then you should open the thigh and take out a piece of skin with sharp edges according to this form.
am subtilitat.	I have subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If that is rarefied and concealed and goes into that place, then you distill from your mouth into the hole of the point of sinew or of the skin or of the wound, and fill the hole on the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And if you do it over that operation when it is almost all done, except that the cauterization does not stay in the hole, then you should remove that, and cure at the beginning the cauterization, entering that it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And if you repeat your operation over that injured part when it is almost healed,
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the eminence of the tear duct is found in the hole for great pain, then suspend it on one; and insert another part into that one, and do not end the insertion before you do not insert it so that no fluids of ulcers come out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And if you distill from the tear duct's skin and sinew when it is healed,
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of inserting of glass and water that comes from the skin adjusted in the hole.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	When some red spots appear on the skin of the face, and they are quickly covered by the eyelid, or if they touch the eyelids and do not cover them well, and the eyelids hang down over the cheekbones, it is a sign of gout.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on the foot is that it causes pain in the top of the foot; and you should open all the holes in that area with suitable forceps or pliers, and then insert the skin at the beginning of the wound, and close it after everything is finished in the groove, and hold it back from the pressure you must apply to your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And is your incision the one that is made by those who have recommended it in the inscription of the unguent, or if it is made with small forceps that are tied together according to the form of this capital?
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When the wound is closed and the whole of the skin is covered with salt, you should fill the hole with water or distill it on the red powder that resembles the powder of corrosive medicines, and place your hand over the wound in front of the cheekbone until it is sure that there will be no swelling from the cut.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If Roman happens to have gout and is in good health, and fears the cauterization of gout, then let him examine the ulcer and treat it with this ointment that yields to the ulcer, and repeatedly apply it over the area until it heals, and it seems to have an effect on the flesh that occurs in the wound of this species.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, I assume that you cover the entire cure of the wound by natural or accidental means, and do not make your mark on any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitulum .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of wool in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Wool that comes from the hard ones which are on the wound and forbids the measurement of its operation, and opens the wound by days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the wound in which the wool is hard is strong and if there is no other malady than wool, then you collect that wool.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	It is that you command the patient to hold their breath while you perform the operation, and suspend those veins as close as possible to the tip of your thumb or index finger according to your caution; and this double extension should be done in this way:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	According to the given context, "o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma" translates to "and then, the two ends should be
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then, secure those veins as closely as possible with the subtlest force, with subtlety, and avoid damaging them too much, as long as you see that they are well-attached to the tissue and are moistened.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And make sure you do not cut the tissue with the spatula; and if your operation is done quickly, and you are careful not to injure those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you are finished, distill in the clear part of the highest point or roast to make sure that the acidity does not become too sharp that is good for the belly.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible to close all at that time, and you apply everything to that which relieves the pain of the patient and rest it for several days until the pain of the patient is subsided and is sure of the cath.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then you should repeat this process on the other hand that is healthy.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not in a language similar
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	De reduccio de arizati al nas" translates to "Of reduction of the nose." However,
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os." translates to:
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	When you discover the bone and sometimes in its corruption or blackness, then you must use this instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is said that the hard head is made of iron, and it should be shaped like the point of a sword or the tip of a needle (like the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Then place that there on the corrupt part of the bone, and rotate it between your fingers, and press your thumb lightly inside as you know that this cure is rasped.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	If it has some scratches, and then restore the place caused by desiccating and shrinking agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the place is consolidated and good flesh grows in it, and the body of the disease and the wound heals in 40 days, and it does not relapse or become infected, then you know that it is cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	However, do not be in this error but reduce the fissure to the form of a nose, and follow this method: and if you discover second time with iron or sharp medicine, then you should take a tribe in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	When the patient's external incision is triangular in shape and the second one is made to enter as many times as possible at the end of the limb, it is called a "fistulotomy.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place the cautery over the bone, and that of the lacrimal; and along the rest of the hand, and around the tube that penetrates all the bones, and it feels the pain as if it were being torn apart by wind and fire when you touch it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the place with the medicinal plasters that dry out the skin as much as possible.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then, as the flesh and skin endure, return the material that has seeped into the edges to their original position, so that it is easier to touch the leg.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On reducing the prominence of the hand.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hand is prominent in its entirety and does not cause any harm or decrease, you should loosen the dressing, and follow it with ventilation in the neck where the scarification was made and allow it to heal well; and place a liniment on the hand that is made of acatra, aloe, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the remedy over the hand with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	When the woman's hands are held by the leopard's paws, and each paw is doubled into four parts; and they are made to bite.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then pause one paw on top of the other according to the quantity of what is needed.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then tighten those paws with a strong grip; and repeat the winding of the wounds; and take away the wind and sharpen the hurt day by day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If you want to soften the ligament, make sure it is straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And take away the ligament as day by day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the wound has already been reduced, then so be it, and if not, repeat the plastering on the paws and the stricture and the winding until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitulum .xxi.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the inscription of the prominence of the uvea tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the uvea tunic, and it becomes prominent and proceeds outside the eyelids as a grain of sand, and its shape is distorted for this reason, and you want to inscribe it as they have recommended, that you enter the agulum into the socket of the uvea from the side where you come out, and place another one on the part where the lacrimal double is, and make it penetrate and leave the first agulum according to its disposition; and inscribe the location of the double agulum and raise that part of the uvea in the circuit of the agulum, and tighten that point.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	When you take out the gallbladder and place it on the injection of ointment made from aloe, enter when the thread falls out of the vagina.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And cure the wound with this that it comforts you when the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some wounds are made of the whole part that is in a circle around the horn, and it is perforated by the subtle spatulum that comes to the fundament of the horn, and water runs into the bladder, and the horn descends and enters as much as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And stretch it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of galls.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This malady, which is called gall, is not the same as that which is adjusted in the horn like water descending and not this one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The most difficult part of working on this is that you must close the wound over the exposed flesh and stitch, and then take the cap and put it on your hands as many times as you can, and when you see the sore coming to the parts behind, and it is dry and does not descend, and the lum remains, and the gall sees the causes as they were.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not go down below, you know it is wet.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the preparation for the descent to the anus is not made, as they have said, then place the buttocks together and press subtly with your thumb on the cornea of the eye and above the conjunctiva of the eyelid, entering if necessary up to the cornea (into the location where it was), entering if necessary to remove the feces.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, if you forget to remove it, you should dilute the water in the container where you mixed milk and water that you already had and fenugreek.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And if the cure is for other causes, then enter if necessary to heal it.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the water that comes from the container.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	As they have said, the species of water are divided and which one corresponds to the declaration of health, then follow that second with the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You must make sure that the anus is between your buttocks on a cushion and the water in the container is warm, the stringent one.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And apropos pause a little from the eyelid of the eye that is the left, if the one that is the left is the one that is the wet, then pause a little from the left; or if it is the right, then pause a little from the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And if it is your left hand that holds the right, if the one that is the right is the one that is the wet; or if it is the left, then hold the left with your left.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And pause the extremity of the thumb at the top of the crown by the largest part of the ray in the album of the eye that is part of the lacrimal bone, and press the thumb with your thumb and roll it with your thumb and roll it with your thumb.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And enter into the album of the eye and feel that the thumb has already penetrated because of the wetness.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And know that the measurement of the thumb is on the measure of the space that is the pupil within the end of the black, and it is the crown of the eye; then you will see that the pupil is in the vision of the eye by the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then pause for a while in the place where the poison is, and then you should cut down another vein on another part, and if the poison comes out much, then lay the abdomen over the place where it can see its sight so much, and pause for a moment in the shade.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then replace it with another small one; therefore, if the poison comes out, you should immediately stop that other vein that is not yet cut.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is healed and does not come out, you should immediately extract it with ease, and raise it little by little, and dissolve in clear salt from gemma a small amount of water, and wash the wound with that; and pause for a moment outside the hollow or stop or infused ointment on rose oil and albuminous juice and liguida am aquo the hollow so.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	We have those who are from our time that pause over that which has been eaten of our juice and albuminous juice.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey my advice to insert the wound in the flesh for its hardness — which is one of the reasons why men have hard flesh — then I advise you to take the salve that is called "alberid" of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	When you perforate that joint, and do not finally remove it from the wound, and do not if you do not make it in a hidden place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then enter the second one as they have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	E you must make the compliment of your work, be prepared for the patient to fall asleep in a position that lies on his back with his head covered with a cloth, and be prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Then pause the nature of the gout because it is lined with its nature, and do not make the eye cap go to the part that is on the right or left side of everything.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the limb be according to its position on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And remove that from that in that dark place and expel the visible fire, and see some causes, and return the limb on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not make gout in the hour of the curers or too much in the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	They have said that you should take gout by so much water that it falls with great and violent regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you encounter a cauterization wound, make sure that the dressing falls off on the seventh day, and correct the one that causes the burn.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Look at the face of the patient and place your hand on his mouth to regulate his breathing for a few days, as it exists in the most gloomy state.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually increase your voice and speak about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	You know that in alchemy, no vision of any kind is excused for the disciple, and you should be careful about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	It has already been revealed to us of those who were the disciples of the Art, and the Art said that he made fire in the Ayrac maiden by perforating the one that succeeds the water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, you have not seen anything like this in our land, nor has anyone read about it in the free books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of maidens over which those who ignore them act:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This subtlety is triangular in shape, with an acute extremity as described above.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the care of the flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various hardened flesh from which one is assembled some cause that is gathered under Scorpio of motz pes, or polyp peys; and this malady is called polypus, as it resembles that represented by those peys.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of the nose there is flesh cancerous, black, and lapadia; and of the nose that the flesh of the lion is not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these flesh of the lion not fraudulent nor cancerous, make sure to close the cavity between your hands and place it on the sun, and heat the nails in those flesh, and pick up the tip in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And if you extract that from the parts of the flesh, and if you inscribe there that which you have understood from those spumed gout subtle from one part into which you know that all the flesh has been left; that if Roman of that cause of the which the abscess is possible, then you do this am with one of the subtle instruments am for ease within which of the Roman it makes a cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord or lady has an injury or accident to the thumb, then stop that which is causing the pain; if it is one of the malignant boils, then cut and cauterize that which is inside, removing the entire sac.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And if your patient's nose is in the same position as the insertion point, then you should agree and agree with it or not.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and humidity is introduced into the palate, then you should know that it has already been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not penetrate through that which is causing the pain, then you should know that there is nothing in the pus-filled bones of the nose that has been removed.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should insert the cure as far as it reaches the area that is causing any swelling, and cleanse it with water, and pause between each part of the quantity of the said or message, and engage the thigh and enter one end of the fist into the nose am the ray or am another cause that may be possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And if this is done, that the odorant may enter when it comes to the nostrils and be placed on the golden snout, which is seen by many children at school, and it is a cause that makes him do this.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extramittats of the eye, one end that goes over the nose and the other that rubs on the nose, and then apply firm pressure on the flesh of the eyes that are in the socket, and if you know that the flesh is already in the eye sockets.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the eye, and place it in the nose with the abstract of the sand one calgua, and keep it for three days or more until the entire eye is completely covered with the sand.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a plug of clay for some days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you need more treatment for cure that exists, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge fazedor who has distillates oil and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make of silver or gold, which is similar to a small lantern that is coming out, as small as it can, and the meat is similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a plug closed as a cane, and the plug of the instrument a capipurge fazedor is flat, discovered; and it is the handle in the end of it, where you hold it when you scrape with oil or water that you want from the sucs and from the causes suctiblas.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This is a recipe for a remedy:
Capitol .xxv.	The text you've provided is a Latin medical treatise from the Middle A
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	The following line seems to be incomplete or missing some context. However, based on the previous lines, it might refer to the nostrils or noses
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	This line seems to be discussing the appearance of the nostrils or noses. It mentions that they are magnified and enhanced on certain days, possibly due to the observer's gaze or observation.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	This line seems to be instructing the reader to carefully observe the appearance of the nostrils or noses and record all findings. It suggests that the observations should be made at the beginning of the examination.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	This line seems to be advising the reader to pause or apply a cautery or medical treatment at the location where the observation is being made. It suggests that the treatment should be applied immediately if it is available in the patient's location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	This line seems to be providing advice on how to observe and record the appearance of the nostrils or noses. It suggests that the observation should be made as soon as possible if the nostrils are magnified, and that the observer should consider whether they are lapificated (possibly referring to a medical treatment), dur (tough), of fusca color (dark color), and with pauc sentiment (few sensations). The observer should not touch the affected area with their fingers, as it may cause further harm. The text also mentions that some people may have a "granda malicia" (great malice) towards the affected area, which may affect their observations.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the gout is from the lion's paw and not from cold color, and sometimes when it appears it can be in all of that, then you remove the skin and insert that same piece into the wound, and cure the area as much as possible that is exposed and creeping in where it is sick and come out.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Regarding the suture of the nose and lips and the hair of the forehead when the continuity is dissolved by plague or seemingly.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity is found in one of these cartilages, few confirmations are found in that operation but in other people's.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when for some reason you come to any of these causes, whether it is fresh plague according to the law of nature, and then adjust the cut lips of the plague according to the suture, and cure that which is sick within.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is found to be healthy, then you should know that you must remove each part of its apparent flesh within which there is no sickness.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	When the wound is properly adjusted to the seam and tightened there, and over it, powder with dragon's blood and other similar ointments is applied, and a small piece of plaster or another of the consolidated ointments is placed on it, either two or three times, and the same ointment is removed and replaced with another that is suitable for healing those wounds, and it is cared for as needed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	Is the manicure of the suture that you add the solution of continuity or an eyelet as they have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity and make it known to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capital Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of extraction of those causes that come in the lips of the wounds.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Motes visible in the wounds of women in the parts of the lips of their labias, which are hard and resemble grapes, and some are soft and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, if you cover the lips and nails of each of those hard parts, and then completely fill the location with something that is strong enough to hold it in place, and then wet it with something that can be easily washed and cleansed, and then treat the location with something that is antiseptic, then it will be healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the scar from the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Grand remedy of veins over the adjusted flesh in the gums that the ancient alabar used, then if you cover that with one or what you have with your hand and hold that with your hand and lay down the scar on its side and let the saint run or the sanc.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then pause over the located sageness or another sterilizing powder or excitating powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then you inscribe that secondarily and cauterize it, and make sure that the cauterization does not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for teeth made of iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the joints and between the gums there are tight, rough, hard, and some yellowish ones that are painful or greenish-colored and are within the gum due to corruption and are the loose teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then cover the thigh with your hands and place the head of the intestine on the top, and remove the teeth in which those rough and hard ones appear, and they seem to be made of sand within which no cause is found, and it is of blackness and citrinity and of others within which they are deformed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And if you are still here, so be it; and otherwise, you must repeat the ratio over those on another day and another and a third until it comes to the end of the statement that you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the teeth have needed various types of cuts and figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for so that the razors are suitable for the tooth, they cut from the part of the joint and not from the other razors, and these forms of razors are those that you must prepare in advance that you have enough:
Capitol .xxx.	The first line of the text is "Capitol .xxx.",
D’eradicacio de dentz.	The second line translates to "Removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	The third line translates to "Make sure you cure the tooth of all its pain completely and gradually in the total removal of the tooth, as there is no cause that satisfies the veins when it is removed, as there is a substance that enters when it is excised during the removal of the tooth.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	The fourth line translates to "When the thigh is about to have the tooth removed, you must be certain that it is the painful tooth that is affected by the veins, and that the healthy tooth is not affected, and you remove it and stop the pain once the painless tooth has been removed, as we have seen in hair removal operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	The fifth line translates to "Therefore, how do you certify that it is the painful tooth and that you know what, when you scrape in the circuit of the tooth, if there is any virtue in the part where the gum of the tooth is dissolved, and take those that are closest to the root, or forfeits subtle ones at the beginning, little by little, until it comes together.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And if you want to cut it with great care or force, and stop the foot between the thighs that hold the one you take, and then pull the tooth secondly in a straight line in a manner that does not touch the one you took, nor the larger pain of the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if you do not forget, take one of those instruments, and place it at the end of that part with ease and effort to remove the one that was made at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is cut or burned, you should carefully cover that part and gently pull it with your hand at the end of the subtle part so that it is not distorted in the moment of your constraint over that.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And work with great care in the circuit of the entire gum part and keep your strength that does not touch it and removes part of it, and return to the buttocks for the worst pain of the tooth.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful that you do not make it as the barbers who perform their operations and courageously remove them, those who do not administer what they were recommended; four visible methods bring large women with difficulties that are trapped, and the benefit of all of them or some of those, or that extracts that tooth from the mandible like the visible methods have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	When the eradication of the wound is washed with water or vinegar, it is customary to apply a salve.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If the flux is accompanied by fever, it is customary to apply a poultice. Take a certain quantity of oak bark and apply it over the affected area, and if it does not cure the flux, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and their thinness are useful for those who have long extractions, with a short handle and a thick head, so that they do not bend when used to operate.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And it is customary to use them as many times as necessary with a long handle, when the extractions are not bent, they are short extractions.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And there are pains of Indian steel in the extractions of teeth, and in the extractions of those there are roots of the kind that some of them are inserted into others and are stretched by a strong descent force, and some of the extractions of those are the form of the beak of an owl which has the name of cony, it is difficult, and they are of great constraint.
Capitol .xxxi.	I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text is not in a
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	The translation of "De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de les mandibulas trincadas" is not clear without additional context. However, based on the words used, it could be translated as "Regarding the removal of tee
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	The translation of "Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:" is not clear without additional context. However, based on the words used, it could be translated as:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The first line of the text translates to: "The symptoms of their pain are like a limit or a wall.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey my instructions and use these forceps or tweezers, you will find that I am holding onto the razor and dissecting all the flesh and inserting the instrument that is called this one, which is a small lever of this kind:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If for that reason the razor is forgotten, then so be it; and otherwise, help me to these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extraction in which there is at least one large one.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it is a triangle and has a fine subtle end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now I have helped you with this instrument, which has two ramps, and this is the form of the following one:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And I will help you with other instruments that you should use in the removal of teeth; four advantages are made with this instrument which is like one large one, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	When the tortuous or short end of the triangle is a large one and is not rounded by itself but is three-cornered, it is called a bend.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing you should know are the teeth that are most similar to the others.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled artificer is more subtle in his art, but he fails because he does not know or use the proper instrument for each malady; four are of the maladies for which the ancients did not have or use different instruments according to the forms of various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or the other bones of the mouth are rounded or if they are swollen, it is necessary to be careful about them in their place as much as possible that is convenient for the instruments and forceps that have been mentioned in the extraction of the teeth, and this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any small enlargement little by little, and it is held or kept in the mouth so that it does not escape or flow through the hole of the bone of all, and the place is restored with suitable medicines for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When there is a small hole in the bone, you should identify that hole and its surrounding tissue, and treat it within the body to heal it.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth in relation to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth do not follow the natural course of the body's shape, and especially when they are more pronounced in women and particularly in religious women; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is not related to another tooth, and there is no possibility of surgery or liniment for that tooth, you should treat that one. However, if it is not anchored to another tooth, you should insert this instrument into that one, as it appears to be like a morsel of meat and is made of Indian iron with sharp edges.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And is your insertion in the one that you insert into that for too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not a part of another tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is expansive, you should line it with iron of India that is of the form of this one.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	This sentence appears to be describing the use of Indian steel needles and their application in treating joint pain caused by hardness or roughness (agulhas). The needles are inserted into the skin, and the doctor checks if the patient's teeth are loose or not. If they are not, it means that no other tooth is affected.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And you have already cut that line in that place, and then sharpened those razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth is broken and the tongue is affected, you should know that the root of that section should be covered with something to prevent the sharp edge from being exposed and corroded, and to prevent the tongue from descending and the word from becoming corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	The restoration of tooth decay is not expensive, either of gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the front teeth are affected by concussion and removal by percussion or impact, and the jaw cannot bear over that hand, and you have treated it with medical styptics, and your treatment has not been effective, then you should know that silver is not as expensive as gold, and argent is made to turn green and to be applied to certain days, while gold does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And it is the finest and most delicate in the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the wedge is that you hold the finely ground powder and hold double the amount between two healthy teeth, and accordingly as the corners of the powdered powder become tortuous between the decayed teeth, or if one or more, it enters through the film to the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And so, you should repeatedly massage the affected area until you reach the part where it began, and apply firm pressure but with caution to avoid causing further harm.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And be careful not to apply too much force to the patient's throat, as it may cause further harm if the wound is not clear.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then, cut the excess tissue with forceps or scissors, and place them in different locations to hold them, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth to avoid causing harm to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then, you should apply that pressure as you would in Rome.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it slides or breaks, apply firm pressure to that or those with another hand in that manner for the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of healthy and damaged teeth, and how many times you should apply pressure to these:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return a tooth or tooth to its proper place in the appropriate locations, and they grow back as recommended, and remain strong.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some bones are suitable for certain causes of cow bones, and they are made in the form of teeth, and placed in a location where the tooth deficiency is present, and they are strengthened as they have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The text you provided is not in the language you described, but rather in Lat
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Translation: "Of the symbol of the liquid that is in the language and forbids speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which I see before me with some visible veins or is natural for the kind of man it is, or accidental and incidental due to plague that has already been consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and French as well. Try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into English:
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any pain or difficulty in that area, and this is for the consolidation of plague, then you should cut and divide that part within which it is adhered by the ligament and dissolve the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to find a false fissure in the skin of the flesh and that you divide here arch and let come out the pus.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And wash the wound with water, if it is dirty or hot or wet; and then place the tongue clean; this is the one that holds the thigh in any way that it is not consolidated another way.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If you find pus coming out, place your hand on the corner that was cut; if the pus comes out, then do cauterization of the spot where you can do cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And that cure is for the other causes within which it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitulum xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	From the extraction of a gallstone, you place the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	When some tongues are affected by language disorders, similar to the small name that prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and it is greatly admired when it swells after biting the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	This is the first line of the text, and it seems to be describing an operation or procedure that is being performed on the patient's thigh. The phrase "huebras la boca del malaute" is not clear, but it might mean "opens the mouth of the wound." The phrase "sesent devant le
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	This line seems to be describing the appearance of the wound or opening that has been made during the operation. The phrase "fusca color" could mean "dark color," and "negra" could mean "black." The phrase "dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment" is not clear, but it might mean "hard, with which the patient does not feel pain." The phrase "lahoras no
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	This line seems to be describing a condition that the wound or opening might be in, and what to do if it is. The phrase "blancor, en le qual es humiditat" is not clear, but it might mean "white color, with moisture." The phrase "lahoras tu met le onci en lu" could mean "you place the needle in it," and "inscideys aquel am spatum subtil" could mean "insert a small amount of serum under the skin." The phrase "e inscindeys le de tota partida" is not clear, but it might mean "and pierce through to the entire part." The phrase "e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio" could mean "if the wound is found during your operation," and "lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat" could mean "you stop and take out the needle." The phrase "so es vetriol
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	When you have finished your work and entered the patient's chamber, enter when the patient is calm and clean; and care for that person as you would for yourself in this manner when they are cured.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an abscess from the breast and of that which is nothing in the groin and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you open in the groin, these are glands that are assembled like cloth, which become deformed and are named gouty breasts, which when you treat them as said in division and are not cured, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, of few sensations, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of the wound. Leave that alone until it matures, and either you or she will break it for itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color and the root is rough, then do not touch that with iron because it may be infected.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The first source sentence translates to: "In the operation you are considering, if you find that the wound has healed or if it has decreased in size due to any diminution; then cleanse the wound with water, and place a piece of cloth between your teeth, and the servant will take hold of your tongue here with the instrument of noble quality which is this form: 
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	This line translates to: "And it should be made of silver or gold, and it should be fine like thread.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then, when you place the tongue on the wound and show it to you, and cover it with that part, hold it there and take it out as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you take out of the dressings, and cut it with that instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled like forceps, but the exits of it are curved, so that the orifice of any of those is in the end of the other, which is sharp, and made of iron polished.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	When this instrument is not at your disposal, insert that hard part of which this is the form of it: If it is sharp for one part, it may be soft for another part.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	It appears that you have inserted honey. Insert the other one following this hand-made tool for inscribing, and then the inscription will be cleansed by water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the flow of blood is small, clean it with water mixed with milk or honey and similar substances as for that of the causes within which the flow of blood is restricted, and treat it accordingly.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some veins may be found in the groin or another place, and insert those following what you have written in the inscription of honey-bound veins.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman with an hematoma that was located in the groin, which hematoma tended to be of a dark color, with little sensation, which had previously closed the groin, and the woman was breathing quickly, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking and water intake, and it had been pervading to death for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the hematoma had already swollen so much that it had been reducing by two steps every time it was raised by two thrusts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Thus, you must sew carefully and remain in one place, and draw out that thread, and sharpen it at the end of that great piece, and then insert the other part of the wound, and press the mouth of it with your tongue, and taste its saliva, and then leave the thighs in that position.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And if you cut a large piece of it, and did not run out of its blood even a little bit.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus, absolutely is the guillotine of that woman, and began to drink so much blood, and then you did not stop inserting into that suture for a long time, and that suture was located in the place where that one was inserted, which prolonged that.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Thus, you must make the thighs of that man hot and cauterized the guillotine of him, and then for addition; and you walk around and do not know what God has done in that prophecy.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of insertion of the hool when it is sutured.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the throat, and it is long and winding, then it is called a "bubbling" or "bubbling" by doctors; and if it is in the rough and round part of the neck, and it is called a "throat".
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the disease is cured and it has been said in the division, and does not comfort your cure, and sometimes you see that the cushion has already left the body and is subtle, then you should cover what you have inserted with that which has been added round; and if it reaches that length and is bloody, of a dark or black color, and does not reach the chest, then you should cover the incision of the body, because there is fear in the thigh.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that second hand that you have told about its whiteness and length, that you make the thigh and press the tongue of the other instrument with which you process its form and place the onion in the new one, and pull it down and insert it into one of two instruments that are called in the insertion of two mells.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	After making the incision, use the one that has been recommended for the incision of two fingers, and cure that part which is sick.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the thigh was affected by the incision of the foot, then use an engin in the cauterization of that part, and the hand of the cauterization should not be wet, and it is that you hold the tip of the thigh in your hand, and press the tongue of the instrument that has been said with the instrument that has been said in the capital of cauterization, and comfort that live cause, and do not make it too thick or subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extratation of the cavity should be made in the place where the cavity of the thigh was paused by medicine, and the instrument of medicine should be placed on the vessel, and the thigh should be wet with saliva or mouth extract of that person for the internal medicine, so that no such cause is deposited on the gallbladder of him and that he descends.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And if you have a sharp pain in the throat, and you see that it is enlarged and dry due to the bites of the physician, then this is a sign of gout.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, take the scalpel and envelope that over the extremity of the toe, and submerge the scalpel in the medicine, and enter the toe into the canula through which the scalpel adheres to that canula, and make as many cuts as you can within a few days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you are told to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and remove the cauterization from the circuit of the grape on the scalpel, and modify it in that aqueous solution that is in the circuit of the medicine, and rinse it with clean water, and treat it deformed by the embrocation, and discard the guarguarismes when it is healthy.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this special treatment is saved if you inscribe and keep it for a long time with fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	When some wounds are treated with the humor of gout that has been placed subtly under cauterization and incision, four things are treated under this manicure: garlic, soap, oil, razor, Arabic cushions, broom, and similar to those of herbs, and adjust all of these causes, or some of them, in one wave, and they are submerged in the water gently, and are washed; and the wave is made to be gentle with the wind, and there is a stopper on the side of the wave, over which a instrument conquau of silver or silver is placed according to this manicure; it is made of silver or silver.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	If there is an opening in the end of the thigh, if steam reaches the uvula over the one, if the uvula is not obstructed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And iterate over those dry wounds if they are not moist, and make sure you do not perform this cure at the end of the event of betting, for too many adjustments in the bet, and it is not that you do this, but you must declare the bet of the cauterization of Lu Caut.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument at your present, take a cane and make a closure of the hood on the mouth of the patient, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, and the closure of the hood prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this remedy is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extracting thorns and of gout that adheres to the groin and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Motas veguadas adhereys to the groin or thorn or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then it is necessary that you extract the gout that appears, over which the eye can see, and if you please, use your tongue on the instrument, so that it is declared to you that it is in the groin.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if gout is not seen and is hidden in the groin, then it is necessary that you make the patient vomit from the groin, so that the food is thrown up in the stomach, and if the cause attached to the groin is forgotten by vomit, or that the patient vomits a pessary of nutmeg or a spoonful of razor grass or a bouquet of seaweed; or take a sponge marine soaked in lemon juice and apply it to that, so that it reaches the location where the thorns are extracted, then you will forget the cause.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	When you may take a snake and dip it in some milk, and then carefully remove it; or take a pear and carefully cut it into pieces and then eat it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you do not remember those causes which they have spoken of, then you should use an instrument similar to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And make it as large as a small pin, and in the extraction of the tooth, make the cavity as easy as possible for you to enter.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the gum over the tooth, and hold it with your thumb, and touch that part of the gum with your finger, so that it comes to this effect: either to remove the bone or the spine, or to make the gum hold onto its place.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, that mouth of the tooth is like honey, because of its knowledge of the place where the cause is annexed and made to fall, and pull out the gum as much as possible with the instrument, so that it does not forget.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitulum .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Chapter on the extraction of the tooth annexed to the gum.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the physician is treating gout pain with this remedy and it does not bring relief, consider using the cold compress on the patient's thigh, as you have recommended to me.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the gout, carefully extract that piece of flesh or make a small incision.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove the gout, use a hollow needle and enter it into the affected area of the thigh, then place a heated iron in the hollow of the needle as many times as necessary (once the gout has died and is located in the thigh), and abstain from giving the patient too much water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full mouthful of water, open the patient's mouth, and clean their mouth with that; and do not let any other cause affect them and drink a glass of water every hour for about an hour after the gout has been treated with the remedy.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If you do not forget that the physician recommended it, use a cimiter or asafetida to sub-smoke the thigh with the instrument that the physician recommended in the smoking of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Another method of smoking is to use a bowl filled with charcoal and ash, and cover the bowl with a cover made of leather or cloth; then place the end of the instrument in the cover; remove the mouth from the end of the canula and close the mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke has reached the sinuses, because the sinuses are so narrow.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If it does not work, repeat the smoking process as often as necessary, and abstain from eating salted foods and alcohol, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that this diet be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument that is used to treat the sinus cavity when it is seen; and it resembles forceps, but there is no curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And the table is placed in front of the patient, and its extremity resembles the beak of a cuckoo, which is plumed, in which they apply limewater, so that when they come across any cause, it does not bother him.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol xli.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this is the sum of the discourse in apercy and sectio of their apostelas.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostelas are special motions, of hand-like motions, according to what is remembered of them, of each in this free book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in forcation and section by hand-like motions of the hands, of which one is for the specialty of apostelas in themselves; and therefore because they understand from the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second hand-like motion is prop for the places where the accidents of the body happen, that the apostela accident in the head is another from the apostela accident in the buttock; and the apostela accident in the fleshly part happens another from the apostela accident in the joint; and each of them is judged by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	When it comes to stitches, some are made without perforating, but rather in maturity of the sinus in those or parts of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	When it comes to stitches, some are made without perforating, but rather in maturity of the sinus in those or parts of them. If they are parts of a limb, and the cause is the compression of the tendons or nerves of that joint, then a post-perforation treatment is needed for that limb. If it is a primary member, and you delay the perforation of the member until its matured tissue is adjacent to the main member, or if it is the anus, then you should not perforate it without proper digestion, but only that which is part of the anus, so as not to cause pain and elongate the anus, and make a fistula, or that which is made at the end of the member that is not yet healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	You should know when to make the hole for the stitch, and then it will be mature.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	You know that the maturity of the subsidence of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in the urgency and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the apothecary, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And what you know is that the puncture should be made in the spot where the apothecary's head comes out and where the purulent matter comes from, after the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should be made by the length of the flesh or of the chest, if the apothecary's heads are in the parts of the thighs or feet, and in places where the ligaments of the nerves, arteries, are; and in all those places where there is no reflection, use the puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the apothecary is in the flesh, you should know that the puncture is made when it is confirmed that the digestion of the second part has been confirmed; that if you perforate that point, the corset of the pole and the endurance of the tongue are prolonged, and that the lips of the endured are deep.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you make small punctures, and large ones in the large muscles and tendons, according to the size of the muscles and tendons.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And if you find other muscles and tendons where the knee is convoluted and adhered, when you make points it hurts as much as that which occurs in many double knobs and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not yet scarred, there are three angles; and of those that are scarred, the appearance is like the face of a mouse, like the muscles of the shoulders.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are scarred, if they are treated with round and lunar incision, it resembles them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	That which is not like the surface muscles of the body, if you find it, cover it with a superficial puncture or plane it as much as possible.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the gallbladder is large and has already been operated on, and it does not close properly, causing the bile to escape; if they manage to extract a part of it, and the next day they insert the gallbladder into another part, and extract a larger portion, and perform more incisions according to the degree of pain that appears, then...
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	If the patient is of low birth, or of a female form, or of a small child, or of old age, then the animal spirit has resolved itself at the exit of the disease, and more firmly the malignant tumor holds onto the body, and you operate on it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take this warning with great caution, and if you perforate the gallbladder in which you are operating on the stones, be sure to cleanse the wounds of the gallbladder or the antique horn; and if the gallbladder is large, and the wounds of the perforation are deep, then be careful that you do not cause any damage to the surrounding organs.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the after-pains, a part of the umbilical cord is separated or has been made concave in the circuit, you should cover that with a piece of cloth or a piece of rag that has been soaked in cold water; and press that into the third day; and proceed with that and cure the one that covers the wound that is inside which is sick.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If at the time of your operation, you encounter bleeding, you should administer cold water and wet a cloth or rag that has been soaked in it, and place that over the location of the wound from which the blood is flowing.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, you should administer regular and careful treatment and powder those that I have recommended in the appropriate places of this free and separated body.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the winter time, and the location of the after-pains is located in the cold nerves, you should cover those with powdered dust and oil, and place them over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer time, and the locations are burnt, you should cover those with wet powder or oil, and all that is inside should be moistened with water as they have said, and you should open the after-pains and clean them and administer treatment to the wound of the one that comes out which is sick.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	When it comes to the cure of ulcers universally, secondly, the way of distinction has already been said for all types of ulcers, in what manner each one is the way of the cure for the specific part.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol 61.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the sections of ulcers that come in the thigh's bend.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the thigh's bend small ulcers, and those of the specific nodes that contain tunics which are their fact; and the specifics of their movements.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And if they are pimples, and those that contain water seeming like honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain water seeming like poles, and resembling them; and of those that are hard, rough.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the entire section, and in the extraction of those that are not feared, as the extraction of those does not cause any contraction of the artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 And the operation in the section of those is what you express those with the instrument in the form that seems to be most appropriate, which is called an incision, and it goes in as soon as you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it is necessary that there be moisture, then you should cut the surface of that part according to its length by making a superficial cut in this way:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	It begins at the cut in line B and goes to the cut in line G. Therefore, when moisture is evacuated, you should remove that part that contains that moisture, and do not leave any trace of it, as many witnesses return, if there is no cause for this.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And if you submerge the cut in Egyptian mud, if there is any, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with the plague and let it enter another day, then this will corrode everything that is visible from that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And you repeat over that cut in Egyptian mud according to your needs and instructions, as soon as you trust that there is no cause for that film; then cure the plague by submerging it in water when it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the gout contains large nodes, then you should cut that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	The first source sentence translates to: "When the incision has a shape of a gash, and you place your hands between the two lips of the incision and pull them apart, you exert your strength in extracting the tunic that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your arch is against me, then you will find that I am the first to be informed.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And if it seems that the incision is being flattened and cut by the posture you have told me; and if the incision on the posture is pushed further, it will be a little less and drier.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some of these postures are such that they do not cause humidity; the cause is because you inscribed on a posture on the head of a woman who was unconscious and made the posture as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be cut, and if it touches an animal, it will harm that.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other postures, accidents do not occur in the head, but this is not the same cap, as the incisions on the heads of children and you have to pay attention to the ears, less the section of these all is superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	You should pause the cutting of those parts that are lower in the body, as it is more likely that the cause of the disease is in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply the remedies that are appropriate for the treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitulum .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the incision of the scrofula that occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Warts visible on these bandages in the neck and on the shoulders and wrists, and some have occurred in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and those warts that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is found in its own skin, and it is like that in the nodules and warts of the head, and it is like that in the nodos and warts of the chin.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the specifics of these scrofula are warts, about some of which are some calcareous, and of those that contain moisture, and of those that are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you see as good position in the Tocament, of which the color of water that is manifested is similar to the color of the skin, and is not good for all parts, and is not annexed to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not compressed, covering that which is dry superficial part of the part from the part of the end of the body of the line of .G. within the line of .B., and burn that entire part, and extend the lips of the skin from one, or from both if you need those, as has been said in the warts of the head, and extract a little at a time.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	When caution is not exercised, the vein or nerve may be pierced.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	If the abscess is not moving, that is, if it does not cause pain or disturb the patient's movement, and if it has not yet been pierced, then do not pierce it; rather, if you have already pierced the vein or artery and prohibit this from your operation, then stop and open the abscess with a knife or another instrument that does not cause pain, and clean the wound, and let the abscess enter that which has been made smooth by the incision and become softened and begin to be discharged.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is expelled.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation after the wound has been closed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if you ask about the second point, whether there is any cause for the other small abscesses, then pierce them and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the course of the great vein, be careful not to pierce that abscess along the vein.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	When a woman's belly is greatly stretched and she feels pain in her womb, it is customary to call this condition childbirth pains.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with the cataplasm that you have already cut from Egyptian flax, and care for that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you insert the entire scarlet fever, then you should adjust the corners of the wound and remove as much pus as possible without causing any additional inflammation.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you see that there is too much inflammation due to the size of the scarlet fever, then understand how to insert the finger, and then administer sutures and close it as it is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	If that scarlet fever contains moisture, make a superficial perforation at the location where you want to close it, and stop perforating when you see that the pus has reached the bottom of the wound, as it has been said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer sutures, use a needle and thread, and make sure it is similar to the others, as it may cause infection of the wound.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When you see that the plague has already been cleansed, then you should treat that one as soon as it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol 33.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	The section of the Apostema's needle caused an injury to the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	We cut off the old section of this needle in the epilhot and did not see any man in our country who had done that before.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Few men have experienced this, as it is difficult to extract the epilhot, as if it were not good for one who has totality of all the veins and the greater parts of the thighs here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Fewer are those who have had the plague in their mouth or groin or two anuses, when the thigh is not in the canal, as they have avoided the section of the epilhot to prevent the loss that is caused by completion.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want to insert the epilhot, you should inscribe three circles of the epilhot's circles, or four small sections for the latitude where there is one circle between two circles, that the section is in cartilage, not in the cartilage, and this place is appropriate for cutting, which is private from flesh and the sinews of the sac are lumped.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the physician is afraid, cover the parts that extend the gallbladder as much as possible, and then insert the codena into the canal as it passes, in order to avoid the vessels of the sinus if any cause exists.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then insert the plaster as recommended; and it is significant over the incision of the canal by the flap which is of that side which is of the disruption and for the abscess of the wound.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And keep the plaster moist for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then at the hour when the perforation is made, add drops of the plaster's juice to the codena of the plaster, and that will help to strengthen the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh more nutritious within which is healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	According to Albucasis, the sum of the sermon that has been recommended is exposure only, which can be seen that the gallbladder has become impoverished due to those posts, and the gallbladder has come to death, and the liver is incised, and they will insert the epigastrium over the plaster so that the gallbladder can breathe over the location of the plaster for some respiration, and it will be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	When it comes to treating the wound, I command that it be cleaned from within after the poison of the malady has been consumed; and the poison of the wound lasts for three days; and therefore, I command the wound to be cleaned in this manner, and cured within those three days.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And as you have seen with my help, it is that a part of the lung is filled with a cotel and is inflamed, and you were called for the cure of the lung, and I cut open the chest as it is open in death, and discovered the plague and cleaned the affected part of the lung that was infected with the plague.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you confessed that it had not been infected with veins or sinews, and the wind was of the plague, and I cured it within those three days that it became healthy.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the wound did not become inflamed if it was not ruptured in the vote, and after a few days, I returned to my duties.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epilhot.
Capitol .xliv.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	The first source sentence to translate is: "De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hernia of the groin is called an "aposteme" after the color of the body, and it occurs more often in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	When the second maniacal attack comes, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is followed by two maniacal attacks, the first resembling grass nodes, and the second resembling apoplexy, which is caused by narrowing of the artery, and there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not assume that this force is like iron in that which is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you help that and investigate that with the said method, and if it resembles grass nodes and is not suspended in any vein, then you insert that eye as the nodes are inserted, and extract that part from where it comes from the pelvis and bursa; and otherwise, you examine all of it to be, and apply care to the place where it covers the cure when it is healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	About the section of the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodes have specific motions, and I have already mentioned all the species of theirs in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	When you recommend that the difference between node and exitus be made according to your own judgment.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	When there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it is said that this cipher is at the point of the shoulder.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And then is the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a cheek and is made up of flesh, whether it is greater or smaller, and there are two species, one being fat and containing humor, and the colors of the humor are motes, according to what you have said in division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Then come the symptoms of the disease, when you reach the cure of the pain, which expounds that and inquires about it at its beginning, according to what is called intromes, which comes in the form of the caput, which is most this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the mane of inquisition of apoplexies and all nodes, and that you take this intromes and enter it into the place humidified which absorbs in the apoplexy, and you roll over the ties which you know that this small by small has penetrated the codena.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then come the last of your but before the measure of the size of the apoplexy, and take out the intromes and consider that it is there in the form of the vestige of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the dryness of the current is forgotten, regardless of what color it is, you should insert it superficially as I have said in the other postures.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture in the wound of the intestine, you should know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And make it dry over the superficial cut in this way:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have taught you, and suspend the cut on it, and remove the skin of the entire part with ease, and keep the pelvis or sac over it and take out that sore from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is torn in the operation, it is not possible to remove that healthy part, and you should look for it carefully and take it out as close as possible to where it does not cause any damage.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it causes any damage, little or a lot, the node returns according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that it causes any small part of the body to react, you should make the poultice with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the poultice, and put it over the post-operative cautery, and cure that from another cure within which it is healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If the wound is large, you should cut off the lips of the patient and treat that as gout that is customarily called.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse is rapid or slow, you should cut and empty the seat of the wound that has been closed for two days or three days until the plague ceases and the fever subsides; and then return to incise that which was closed.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the stitch necessary in section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the incisions, and there are three species, which of those is the greatest, and of the others is smaller.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the incision greatest is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the incision smaller is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the incision smallest is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are wounds of iron, of nails, of the extremities of branches that are gently bent, so that the stitch is firm in the openings.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the wounds, and they are called wide, and one of them is called the bride.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	When it comes to three species, four of them are large, smaller and fewer.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experience is the form of me:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the smaller experience is the form of me:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the few experience is the form of me:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is understood that these are for those wounds, fistulas, and abscesses that enter those bones and other causes:
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And these pains are large, stones, and long, like great needles as those that are found in the shells, and are painful from lemons, or from iron, or silver, and the worse ones when they are from lemons:
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And these pains are the experiences of black plums, which seem to be related to those that open the fistulas in their cavity, which are reflected as reflections of their levitation in those reflections:
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And these are of three kinds, four of which are the longest, and others smaller, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and the stricture of it:
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin,
Forma del experient migier de plom:	It seems like the text is discussing the shape of an experienced gout (joint pain) patient. Here's a line-
Forma del experient petit de plom:	by line translation:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the gout are special movements, four of which are simple ones, where only one curve is present, and there are three kinds: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their gout or punctures, and of the three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And if those gout points have different curves, and there are three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of their punctures, there are three curves, and there are three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of this is necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a simple large gout point, the form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple medium gout point, the form of it:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a simple few gout point, the form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of an orp (or outlet) for a large gout point, the form
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of an orp for a medium gout point, the form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of an orp for a few gout points, the form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large gout point with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a medium gout point with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The first line of the source sentence is "Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:" which can be translated as "The form of
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The second line of the source sentence is "Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:" which can be translated as "The form of
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The third line of the source sentence is "Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:" which can be translated as "The form of a
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The fourth line of the source sentence is "Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:" which can be translated as "The form of a
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	The fifth line of the source sentence is "E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquells es gran, migier, e pauc." which can be translated as "And these are the forms of the scalpels that are cutting and scraping the nodes and the attachments, and they are of three kinds, four of which are large, one is medium, and one is small
Forma de scapel gran:	The sixth line of the source sentence is "Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:	The seventh line of the source sentence is "Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:	The eighth line of the source sentence is "Forma de scapel pauc:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ninth line of the source sentence is "Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquells sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema." which can be translated as "The extramittents of those that are cut with sharp scalpels and the others with blunt ones, and not paused in such manner, but because it is well for the excoriation of the nodes the fear of inoculation of veins or nerves, and for those it heals the thigh and brings tranquility to a little by the adustion the which atrobes the excoriation of the attachment.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	This is one of the forms of magical charms, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, as you see in the examples.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the great charm:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium charm:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small charm:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are the symptoms of the disease and its appearance, which is like alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the external part that has been punctured and hidden in the secretion of the parts of the fingers and nails, when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spices, which are placed between the parts that you see in the perforation of the apothecary and do not penetrate the thighs, and there are three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of venesections that are used when the flow of the sinus is cut off, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of the blood:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are the symptoms of the disease, which are round oranges in a certain length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When it comes to these kinds of winds, you need to use great, larger, and fewer doses, because for those that are fast-flowing and need to be drained quickly, and when you first begin, no medicine is needed.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those winds to drain sang in the entire body, and only in fatty locations, as in the hips, thighs, breasts, belly, and genitals, and similar to those of fatty cartilage humors.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some points are made by those instruments that are smaller and resemble the semblance of a needle; for which the sang is drained when it is made by fleebotomy, or you must incise the vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some points are round in shape according to this form.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the breasts of men who are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some points are inflated in the breasts of certain men, you must give them the complement of sleeping when they begin to be hairy, and the points are inflated, and the breasts are assembled, and the breasts of women and Roman women, and legs.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When a person has gout, it is important to cut the affected area according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then clean the entire wound, and apply the medicated plaster, and adjust the edges of the plaster according to the size of the wound, and care for the affected area until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple declines and is softened by its own weight, like in the case of women, it should be divided into two parts and placed side by side, in two similar lunar shapes, with each part contained in the other. When the larger one contains the smaller according to this form of the line from .B. to .G., and then clean the area that comes between the two lips of the plaster, remove the dampness, and apply what has been said about the suture and powders needed in the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of this that is cut according to the patient's anxiety and the flow of sweat, and you cover that plaster with a cloth submerged in corrosive water and lay it over that which is corroded and comes from the skin, and care for that area until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language similar to
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	I apologize, but I am still unable to understand the language of the provided text. It does not appear to be a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but I am still unable to understand the language of the provided text. It does not appear to be a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you please provide more context or translate it into a language I can understand?
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	I apologize, but I am still unable to understand the language of the provided text. It does not appear to be a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you please provide more context or translate it into a language I can understand?
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	I apologize, but I am still unable to understand the language of the provided text. It does not appear to be a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you please provide more context or translate it into a language I can understand?
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	I apologize, but I am still unable to understand the language of the provided text. It does not appear to be a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you please provide more context or translate it into a language I can understand?
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is extended so that it causes bleeding, then you should administer the cautery in the same way as in the case where they have already had it done.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of sections of gauze that occur due to arching or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the arching is torn and the cord is consolidated over it, then visible postulates occur in the area where the artery or vein is inflamed: for one, when the postulate is due to arching, it is added to the corner of the chest; and for two, when the postulates are felt in the thighs, you will hear stridor in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to the vein is red in the manifestation of the chest.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if there is an error in this postulate, and particularly in the ones you leave behind, and in the ankles, and in the collar, and in many parts of the chest; and it is very large, so that the cure should be avoided, and that which is in the extramits or at the top, it should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	When there is inflammation in the opening of the urethra, cut through the skin in that longitudinal direction; and then divide the urethra with uncinated sutures and the bladder, and leave the tunics within where it is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Place the plug over that hole and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the urethra with a double fascia in two places, which causes you to have difficulties in extracting the other urethras that are in the testicles.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And pour the liquid that is between two ligatures and it permeates throughout the entire part, and dissolve the gum.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer the cure in which the poison is introduced into the ligatures; and cure that which is conveniently placed within so that it becomes healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the gum is caused by a vein cut, then you should know that you have it in your hand that is possible for the gum to be in your hand, and introduce the plug into the place where you have taken out the one that you have, and make it penetrate; and it should be in that double fascia within which you extract the other from the other side, and ligate the gum with a ligature according to what you said to me in the ligature of the four parts of the hand that are at the extremities.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread may be pulled out, then enter the eye of the needle as it is located at that same loop, and stretch the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Dry the wound as much as possible in the location where it is and when you see that this is not enough, then insert the excess of the cloth into the codpiece, and cut off what is left of it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then stop over the powder that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure that is made of herbs and extracts to come out when it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitulate to the wound that occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	How does the wound occur in the artery and vein, and it seems that the wound occurs in the nerves when they are struck or occur due to excessive work, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And if the pain is in the locations of the assistants or the heel, or in all places where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And the wound is severe, and it resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of their dispositions and when they are stretched with great force, it feels like a stupefying sensation in the buttocks.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	When the needle is not inserted into the chest, and the wound is closed, and it is completely healed and does not extend to other parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who are in the joints do not cover that they are covered with iron, for if you want to get rid of the contraction, you must use a forceps.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May that which is in the head or on the face not be saturated with blood.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is an injection of little pain, then use that and cut off the part that is causing the inflammation.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then use that and exfoliate it, and remove that part; and adjust the wound to the suture, and cure that inside which is healthy.
Capitol .li.	End of Chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of the injection that happens to the lip that happens to the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Endeven to the husband's cough that appears in the stomach of those and in other parts of the chest of those which are similar to those of the lungs, for the inflammation is subtle and the head of that is large; and already the lips of those are conversant, and it is of those who are small and of those who are magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	When you have already seen it and looked inside, and in the abdomen of the patient there were two parts that were less like what they should be, and there was no difference between those white ones, of little importance.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were facing backwards and being made, and moisture ran throughout that entire time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then you inserted those and tightened them on the left foot, and the other on the right.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the insertion of those is that you consider it good if the thigh is moist, and the color of the hernia is white, moist, of subtle importance; you insert them with salt, and they are in your presence at the focus, four watches after the section, the sanc is expelled without pain; and if you find the sanc, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the thigh swell and tremble, keep your hand away from the insertion of the hernia; rather, let not recent point be made on that hernia, and the one who has said so, and let it be held for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust the stricture of the blood vessel; therefore, do not continue to tighten the blood vessel greatly, as it is separating and falling away from its own part.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the member is large, there is often a cause of fear and pain, and especially in those that are in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you separate the joint of the member, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for that after it has been healed by the plague.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to cut off the member that is of dark color, of little sensation, of long viewing, and that it is not cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And when you come to remember again in this way.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the eminent cure of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Eminence of the navel is caused by various motives; or by fissures of the umbilicus which is over the stomach, and it comes out of the intestine or hernia as in other ruptures; or by scarlet that flows from veins or arteries as it is said, or by stricture narrowed in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	When the pain is in the abdomen and in the membrane, the color of the aposteme appears similar to the color of the chest; and it seems to come from various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is for the removal of the intestine, place its position in that place where they have found it with less violent diversity, and when you present that to the tylers, it is hidden, and then return it; and much more so is it for the intestine itself, and it is a great matter to open the abdomen and work with force.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to humidity, then you are a lion and it is not hidden when you present your hand to the patient's thigh, nor is it tightened, nor is it gripped.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for this reason, then you use these scars to appear as though the aphrodisiac is negating.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is for this reason, then you use a strong, thick, and heavy aphrodisiac that remains after a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to dryness, then you touch the lion's part with your hand.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in that part is considered a lion's eminence, whether due to castration by artery or vein, or dryness; you know that it is prohibited for the cure of the patient, for there is fear and no one knows how to do it in the capital where I have mentioned the aphrodisiacs by artery and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	When the prominence of the navel is in the belly or on the cloth, you should command that the patient holds the navel with both hands and extends it; and then, with a firm hold, command him to turn around between his own legs, and surround it with both hands over the navel's top, and extend the fingers of the hand holding the thumb on the navel's circuit; and then, in the circuit, stretch the finger of the other hand as far or as close as possible, and hold the other hand in front of the patient's face.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then extend the fingers of the hand holding the thumb over the abdomen and insert the given digit into that point and wants the belly; and if you have not struck or held by the abdomen, then you should pull it out and push the belly to the parts of the stomach.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have struck the cloth, then hold that with both hands; and insert the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your arc or vein, then surround that point with both hands and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them in those two firm places and enter two needles in the circuit around the navel in the hand holding the crotch, which threads penetrate; and stretch the navel over four parts on the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you want to remove the beads and clean the area where the flesh extends and falls on itself; or insert them when they are subtle and will fit, and carefully cover that part with what covers the incisions that are inside and are healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the eminence of the navel is flesh or due to moisture, then you must cover the opening with what you have said and avoid damaging the sanc or humidity, which damages it, and carefully cover that part with what covers and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol, liii. (This is a Latin phrase that trans
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of carpentry. (This is a Latin phrase that refers to
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	It has been said, in the division, of the species of carpentry and in what manner it is treated by physicians, and that it is fevered in it by the physician who does not cause ulcers; and it has been said that carpentry is produced by the maid and caution in the treatment of the disease.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And cut the ancients that some carpentry is in place where eradication of the disease is possible, as for cran which is in the mamillas or in the cushion and to their likeness to the members allocated to scatter all that, and especially when beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is time to treat and examine the patient, you should not think that this is for your own good, but rather for the good of the patient, and that it may be beneficial for them.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	When the operation is on, as we have said, it is because you precede and lay the patient down and take out the purgative of black blood, and then observe that, if it is greatly swollen with manifest edema.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient in the preparation that is located at the operation site, and then place on the tray those that cover that; and carefully examine all parts of the body with good intention to enter if there is no cause for the symptoms of the patient.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And run the stitch, and do not leave that corner untied, and expose the wounds, and remove the stitch as much as possible from your hand or from the instrument you have at your disposal.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have any objection to using a large stitch in the vein or artery, then cauterize that within which the flow of the stitch is stopped, and cure that among those who are healthy.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 26.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of gout.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended in the division of the specifics of gout from the water, and the doses of each species for the cure of the patient by the physician.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	When that which is cured is made of iron, it is not the same as the specialty of aluminum alone, and it is not similar to the specialty of drums or of ypocras, for it is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	E when you have medicated this specialty of drum with medicines and it does not improve your condition, consider that if the thigh has already achieved flatness or is another one of this type of belly, as if there is in it a toss or stomach problem, then keep in mind that you should not use iron, because there is fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Mays if you see the thigh of abundance of virtue, and it is not another thigh but another type of drum so much, and neither child nor old, then the maneuver of the operation of the thigh is that you raise it between your own legs, and the minister expresses the stomach of it with its hand, extracts the water from the end of the penis, and prepares spines in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp end like spittle; but if it has any shortness little by little, then in the operation it will not enter into the intestine, and you will see that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	When considering the generation of gout, it is believed that the intestines play a role, as you can observe that the incision is made in the umbilicus for the quantity of three digits in the parts beyond, on the right side over the pubis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of gout is due to the patient's laziness, your incision should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of gout is due to the melasma, your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	It is not necessary for your incision to be on the side of the abdomen that you want to lance, as it may cause unnecessary bleeding in that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And with the instrument, perforate through the entire abdomen, and enter into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the abdominal wall and the siphon, and remove that; and if it is a small amount or an enema.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And with the cipher, perforate through the umbilicus, and enter where the spatula reaches, and that is the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and enter an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it resembles a silver canula; it is made of silver or gold or leather, of which in the part where it enters there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two of one type and one of another type; and it is the end of the instrument that is inscribed according to the pen of the hand, as many times as possible.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the extramition side there is an armillary sphere, four of which are placed over the instrument when it pierces the water, and you draw over the instrument so that the water is evacuated in that quantity, and if you do not cover the entire amount in that time, then the spirit animal may be resolved for the relief of the body, or it may be five cups that are approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	More water is evacuated according to the quantity of the virtue of the body and according to what you mean by the dispositions of the body's virtue of the thighs and of beauty.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and let the water that causes it flow out as much as possible, and retain that water which is held by the grip of the hand that holds the hole which is over the cipher that you are recommended to perforate with that according to the manuscript.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	When the instrument is used on another day as many times as the patient can tolerate, and a small amount of water is extracted each time, and it is done for several days to avoid dehydration, and keep an eye out for any mistakes that may occur due to lack of water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear the patient and give them a large amount of water, treat them as if they were in a grave covered in sand, move their body in wet clothes, and expose them to the sun for a long time; and treat them with desiccating medicines if they are healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the mass is fitted as close as possible to the water extraction, according to what I have told you in writing that has been done.
Capitol .lv.	Capital of Latvia.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the care of children who are born in locations other than the urinary opening.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some women report that their child is born from the abdomen of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or is straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, a cauterization is needed to perforate the membrane as little as possible, according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the wound a small hook of lead and attach it to that, and do so for three days or until [it is] three hundred.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when you want to urinate and have difficulty and pain; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine will come over the area, and this hook will not hold.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	More of that which the wound is straight and is treated with a lead hook as they have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	More of those in which the wound is not in its place, it is ledge, which causes it to be short of those, the one that was born and the wound is due to the edge of the pubic bone because it cannot urinate in the parts below; and it is not of this generation, because so the sperm does not reach the deeper part, and it is wasted.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the maneuver of the operation in you is that the thigh be placed over the right side, and extend the edge of the pubic bone of you to your left with vehement extraction, and insert the cap of the pubic bone of the location of the perineum into the hole that is rough like a lead hook, as if it were written with a pen, or that you do not know any part, so that the edge of the thigh seems like the cap of the pubic bone and the wound falls in the next location as it should.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	You should pay attention to what happens in your operation of the urinary flow, as four things may occur to you; stop and take the remedy that has been prescribed for you, and care for the wound that has been made when it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	This is a Roman numeral, which corresponds to the number 565
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	In the prepuce of the head of the penis, where the foreskin is located, and the neck and adhesion of the prepuce of the head of the penis, something may happen.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Visible things may occur to this foreskin in the penis and it is made of fleshy tissue.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And if one is malignant and the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, but rather suspended under a fine thread and cut off that part within which the whole wound is located; and then cover it with a thin cloth over the Egyptian incision; and that, care for the wound with the remedy that has been prescribed for you, when it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the foreskin is malignant, apply a leg of cloth, and then administer cauterization to the incision and the root of the penis.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the prepuce of the penis is not circumcised and one part of the prepuce is cut off and the other part is left intact, then you cover that part with skin that was cut at the beginning until it is consolidated; and when you treat that raw edge, be sure that it does not become infected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if there are already infections in the genitals and the black and wrinkled prepuce, then cover that which has already been damaged and which is about to be corrupted or corrupted; and apply a poultice of flour made from the crushed wheat and dried galls and thorns.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And when you treat that with the other cure, enter when it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is an abundance of pus, then you administer cauterization with moon-shaped points in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Two types of cauterization are used, one for the pus and the other for the blood that becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the tip of the tail is corroded and destroyed completely at that time, you should cover that you insert into the meat of the prepuce a catheter for so that the urethra urinates for that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the prepuce to the tip of the penis (and this attachment only occurs in the one where the prepuce is, and not on the circumcision; and when it occurs attachment due to phlegm or suppuration), you will find that you can extricate it with a slight spume if the cord is dissolved and the tip of the penis is entirely separated.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to understand those things, you will find that you can extricate it with a slight spume from the tip of the penis and the cord, and so the prepuce, when it is very fine, is perforated by its fineness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And you separate the prepuce from the tip of the penis with a fine spume, which is already wet in the urine so that they do not adhere to another surface.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And you apply a cautery if it has been consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 76.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the worldly education of children and the care of that which occurs to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuous wounds like other plagues: but rather, it is necessary when it is our operation and our will, and we are doing it for the sake of the children, we must assign it to a better operation and let the fewer ones be saved.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Thus, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on all of their slaves, as they did not use it in their laws, and this is because they have acquired by experience that the major part of artisans and barbers use circumcision and hygiene for novacula and torores; and they use false liament and inscizio on the ungla.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and did not improve the outcome of the operation for the surgeons, for it is not clear how the codon will be affected by the ungla, where four motas may escape from the codon, where the codon of the prepuce is in two tunics, and then the tonica is placed further, and then the doctor becomes frustrated with another incision and safe pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	When the wound is cleaned with aloe vera, and it is digital, the one who uses it is the barber, but the security of the end of the male member is not guaranteed, for it may enter into the wound of the man.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, you must be careful, for iron and corruption may spoil your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and there are no visible movements in that manner that does not require cleansing, and you have seen that one.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And the cleansing that you do with forceps and tweezers is not as good as it seems, for the sharpness of the forceps is not proportional to the sharpness of the tweezers; and when you make your own sharp ones and insert them into a wound in a short time, and you compress the wound with the figure containing the umbilical cord of the entire part, which does not have any error in total.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stand upright if it is of those who understand a little, which you do not do except that you listen to the umbilical cord in its place and that you see that one enter another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	When you have found that pleasure in the entirety of that member that is within your power to receive, then you will find that it brings you joy.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then make that member stand firmly prepared, and do not be ashamed; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind you, so that the child does not see those or other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into the groove of that member and exhale into the codena, and remove that which is causing the pain at the top of the groove, and adjust it so that it does not cause deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then tie that location with a thread of silk, and attach a small lock to the second ligament, and then take hold of that spot where the ligament ends and make sure it has good retention, and insert between two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the codena above the lips and adjust the top of the groove; and lightly scratch the skin with your fingernails, as much as possible; and sprinkle some powder over it and on the powder, mix it with olive oil that has been cooked recently; and apply that to the other day, and care for it as it heals.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps in surgery, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	When some are too narrow and others too wide, it is not the key that fits, but the length of the narrow ones and the length of the broad ones compared to two thumbs engulfed.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	When there is an error in world creation, it is often the case that one seeks to hide the inner code entirely, or to disguise a part of it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	And so, I extend my request to your time and ask that you do not disclose the secret of the location's apostemacy and that the second equality is kept hidden.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot keep it secret, take out the other part and hide that as well.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days and the post has been deflated, then you should enter as soon as possible to remove the post-coital pill, and cleanse that part with difficulty, and hide the second part that is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep the head of the post as a secret, so that it will not be known to him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then cure that part with the consolidated plague of the powders that have been recommended in the book of the powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is hidden under the code, and follows the parts of it, then he will not know that.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	When it comes to treating that gout that they have said is cured, it is important to follow the doctor's instructions carefully. This is because the treatment for gout can vary depending on the severity of the condition and the individual
Capitol .lviii.	This appears to be a reference to a specific section or chapter in the treatise
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	This translates to "Of the treatment of urine retention in the uterus." This suggests that the treatise may discuss medical procedures related to urinary tract
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling of the bladder due to stone or scarlet, or by inflammation or inflammation, and seems similar to those of gout that have been said about the division of the intestines. This suggests that the treatise may discuss the causes and symptoms of urinary tract infections and how they are treated
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved, and there is a sign of retention of the urine, which is due to the stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then you should know that the uterus is wrapped around the sides of the vesica. This suggests that the treatise may discuss surgical procedures or other medical interventions to treat urinary tract infections
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that over the side of the abdomen and extend the abdomen from the part where the side of the abdomen ends to the other side, and the uterus is stretched as much as possible. This suggests that the treatise may discuss medical procedures related to the treatment of urinary tract infections or other conditions affecting the urinary system
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	When you need to push the lower part of the vagina outwards to expel urine from the behind parts, that is what is done.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the doctor has not dissolved the gout properly, you should cover the cause on the thigh with a cold injection of the instrument called a hydrosyringe, which is made as follows: It is of silver and subtle leopard, and it is inserted in the subtlety of a long ray, like a palm and a thumb, at the end of which there is a subtle canal.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to expel urine from that is to hold the doubled urethra and pull on the hair or beard for good drainage; and insert the extractions of the urethra into the part beyond the ring, and insert them into the clasp if there is any cause for the hair, more so with vehemence. And then smooth the border and album of the skin.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the uterus on the saddle, and rub the vagina with oil and olive and honey.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	When the ring is inserted with ease into the opening of the thigh; and then bends the thigh down towards the abdomen; and presses the ring into that place; and presses it in as it enters the vesica, and cents the uterus being entered by the cause of the pain, and nothing else is done according to this order, except for the matter in which it is necessary.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And extend the urethra little by little, until the urine comes out through the lining.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Extract that and use the ring for cleansing the urethra, and continue to do so until it is empty and use the ring inside as the bladder is emptied and the uterus is relieved.
Capitol .lix.	 Chapter 17.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of the castration of the vagina, it is clamped and similarly instrumented with those that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the uterus, or a cyst is formed therein, or there is a tear in the peritoneum, and you wish to distill water and medicines through that, then use a clamped instrument called the clamp, and this is the form of it:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If, during the extraction of the patient, the area is dark, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	In that case, there are three parts: two of which are already known, and one is unknown. The two known parts are "dos de la una partida" and "ayssi quo vezes". "Dos de la una partida
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, it is located in which it is inflamed, and the second quantity that oppresses that, its addition, when any cause is brought to that torn part of the humors, it is attracted, and when it is expelled, it is attracted, and when it is expelled long, the third that is clamped is the one that phthysis naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When you want to prevent moisture in the vagina, insert the end of the clamp into the moisture, and draw it out with that which is pressed against the parts thereof, so that the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the clitoris.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And insert the extremity of the clitoris into the urethra as has been recommended in the circumcision; and press upon that moisture with which you press, so that this moisture reaches the vagina most quickly, and the thighs come to that place.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the cristae is subtle, and this is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	 And if it is made of silver or lead, of the which the cap may appear to be like a small pen, and from it a thread is drawn.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take the vagina by motion, and stop in that moisture which you want to cristae in the vagina, and place it between two with great care, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And insert the end of the cristae into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	When you approach the patient's thigh, gently stretch it and apply pressure to the area where the humidity has penetrated the vagina, as that humidity has already permeated the vagina.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a vagina, take a gauze and wrap it around that circle; then pierce it completely through that; and enter it firmly into those holes, so that it is released; and add the circle so that it is added also, as if you are holding that amount of humidity that you want to hold in your humidities, and openings.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that to the instrument and make it as you made it in the vagina, and express it inside where the humidity has entered into the vagina.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the Extraction of a Stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the species of stone and its treatment in medicine, and the difference between stone produced in the testicles and stone produced in the vagina, and their treatments.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	The first line of the text says: "E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccion.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	When the stone is generated in the true vesica, it is that which is found in the vesica.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you relate this to that clear and concise explanation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, say that the stone generated in the true vesica is actually seen in children; and from the halves of it comes urine that seems like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the thigh covers its privy parts, and moves its legs, and is dressed; and a little later, it opens the mouth in the motion of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is wonderful that the pediatric care of those who have reached twelve years of age; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In the young, it is easier to find that which is between those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which is the stone that is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is few, it is opposed to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, how to reach the cure of that, come at the beginning of that which is described by Christians who see the thigh that extragua the entire fence that is in their own buttocks; and that fence some veins prohibit the envy of the stone, you must do the inquisition of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	When the pain is felt in the knee and it is swollen and hard to the touch due to which the stone descends into the prepuce of the urethra or jumps from one place to another, then...
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And place that dressing between your own prepared parts, and the other parts of her are placed with cushions under them, so that the entire urethra is made to descend to the parts outside.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And make sure that this and the entire dressing is clean.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the space, then carefully cut it as much as possible over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If the entire part does not touch, then you should cut it as much as possible with the left hand of the patient, if the knee is childlike, or with the right hand if it is fully grown, and insert that into the vagina.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And make sure that the stone goes in when you insert it.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually insert it into the top of the urethra.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And press on that with your finger, and expel it from the parts outside to the location where you cut it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the attendant to press on the vagina with her own hand; and command another attendant to have her left hand extend the labia to the parts below, and have her other hand tighten the suture that is now holding the labia in place, from the location where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then enter the spatula and insert it into the incision so that this is the form of the ligament:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut it off in that place where the thigh and labia meet, not in the middle, but rather at the left cushion; and let the incision be over the said thigh and the knot be transverse, so that the incision is wide and not too tight, according to the amount of the thigh that can be cut off, and not more, for if the knot is in the thigh, the incision must be made on the thigh, and it is forgotten its deficiency.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you know that from the thigh there is some angle and margin, for the incision of which it is difficult to make.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This condition resembles a lion's roar, and is round in shape. It is made up of the leucorrhea and the salted meat.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it is that which causes the angles to be bent and twisted, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not forgotten, you must know what to do about that, or how gently to apply pressure on the part where the pain is felt most, as if you were pressing on the heel of your hand, and not forcing it; or if you must use an instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do so on that part, then amplify the hole with a small tool, and if you see flame, decrease the pressure on that part which has been made acidic by the vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the foot is of a different size, then at the beginning you push the foot into the opening of the vesica and place it over it; and then push a small amount of water in; and seemingly make such movements if they are fewer than ten.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, ignorance is that you have inserted it into that great section, which then happens to the thigh: whether it is alive or not, and whether it remains in the continuous urine distillation, so that the place is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May the expulsion of the stone be made as soon as it is outside, or use an engine in the fracture of the stone that goes out through the urethra and is placed in pressure.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, fill the plague with aloe and dragon's blood ointment, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that drape the enfused oil and vinegar, or in rose oil and water, so that it does not cause swelling.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And return the thigh to its original position, and do not slide the limb inside the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	Then when it has slid, wipe the place with water and oil, and apply creams to that part twice a day until it is healthy.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If plague occurs in the thigh, there is inflammation and ulceration, and it appears as if the bone is frozen in the vesica, and for that reason the prohibited urine (and this is known by the exit of the urine from the kidney) is inserted into the said plague and the frozen sac is extracted, so that the bone does not cause the vesica to rot and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the plague with water, salt, and water, and in its opposite position, it is suitable for the cure to enter when it is healthy.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover the plague in all the curing hours that you lie down and adjust the medicines that are placed over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the gravel is small and is in the middle of the urethra, and it sticks to it, and urine is prohibited, then you cure that by using what I recommend when you come to cut, because many cases of this curing have been accused of cutting; and I have already done so, and this is the form of it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	When there is a triangular extrusion of the humor, it becomes hard and solidifies into a knob.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then hold on tightly, and tie it with the skin to prevent it from returning to the vagina.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the skin, easily piercing it with that piercer into the penis.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	Then rotate the piercer in your hand and into that penis little by little, and you will perforate the perforation of the urethra so that you can penetrate the other part; then the urine will be completely excreted.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand over it and on that which is raised from the penis, where it is thin, and it becomes thin again, and the urethra is forgotten by the urine, and the thigh is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure does not suit you for any reason that prevents you from doing it, then tie the penis with a knot on the tip and another one on the root.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then wrap around the penis in that vagina between two layers of cloth.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that part.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	When you have removed the limb and modified the sinew, which is made in the plague.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to remove the limb from the bone, but because it does not return to the cavity, and the other limb also descends, when you uncover the bone of the foot, the coda returns to its place and seizes the plague.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And so it is necessary for you to know when you have uncovered the bone, that you raise the coda to its parts, or that you return the best complement, and seize the plague with those who have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol.lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of extracting stones from female feet.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in female feet are rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see stones in any of those, the cure is difficult and it is prohibited by force-feeding.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very strong and sees it.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is very wise that can take it when it is cast, or is of the women who have not been circumcised.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	When you have finished opening the space between the patient's thighs, you will not find any female attendants who know this art, particularly the operation of making points.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision on the heel in women is longer than the location of the heel, so it requires a larger incision, and there is fear of that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If necessary, you must believe that I have a female apprentice who is skilled and few in number.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are private about that, you should find a female apprentice who is subtle and skilled, or present a female matron who is experienced in the art of women, or a female who has learned this art from it.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, make that presentation, and command the person to perform all that you will tell them, from the examination of the heel to the beginning; which causes them to look if the woman is pregnant, believe that you say the place you want in the buttocks of the person and want the heel.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If that fears you, take that away from here, and command the person to insert it where you said.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If the secretion does not appear, command the midwife to enter her fingers into the vagina and inquire about the pain on the left side of the bladder, and compress that good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If it does not improve, command the midwife to gradually insert her fingers into the vagina at the points on either side of the bladder, and compress that good compression.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And place the hand over the area of the vagina where the bladder is located, and adjust the position of the cushion according to the part that is comfortable for you and center the penis in that area, and it should not cause discomfort in the vagina.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision is small at the beginning; and command the midwife to insert her fingers into that incision, and if she feels the penis, adjust the size according to the amount that you know that the penis will enter that part.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You know that the parts of the penis are motes: four of those are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	This is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The text you provided is a continuation of the previous text, and it seems to be a conversation between a doctor and a patient.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you wish to remove blood clots, adjust the site where it was inserted and leave it there for an hour until the clot is dissolved, and then return to your operation when the stone is out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare yourself with the instruments you need to say in the removal of stones in men, so that you can help those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you wish to remove blood clots and know that the expulsion of the clot is from the artery that was inserted, then stop dusting over the place and stretch the skin with powder and do not return there; and remove the stone and do not pull it out, for if you die, your wife will be left a widow.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And cure the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharpness of the clot is reduced to a small amount and the area becomes wet, then return to your operation when the stone is out.
Capitol lxii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text "Capit
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	It seems like you're providing a single line of text in Latin. Here's my best attempt at translating it into English
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not merely an addition of moisture in the white vessel, which is left with the codon of the genitals containing the heart, and is called a vessel.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veins are in the proper fascia of which the prepared nature is in the part of the heart, if it is such that there is another heart; and the codon of the genitals is between the white vessel which I have said, and it is not called anything except tar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is by decreasing that affects the genitals, because it comes to be this material in those, and some things happen by striking a point on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has different colors, either the color of it is like lemon or red or blood, or black excrement, or white mucous, and it is said that it is more.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the ways by which this addition of water is cleaned are those for this: if it is in the white vessel which I have said, then you should reduce a little lengthwise as a figure of the heart, and appear the genitals, where the moisture counts that of all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If moisture is in the original pancreas, then you should remove a part of it and believe that there is another one inside.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If moisture is between the spine of the genitals and the white bone, then you should pull it out as far as possible.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, spread the color of the moisture on the post or piece of wood that follows; and then, according to what is seen in the appearance of the post, judge from there what it should be cut down.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when you come to the treatment of the iron wound, make sure that the dressing is clean and as possible, and sometimes the part of the body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if it is placed over the supine back for any cause, and stops the movement of the cloth.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the attendant to follow the right side of the patient, who extends his arm from the left hip to the lower part of the spine of the genitals and the lower part of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And take some sweat and cut the spine of the genitals in the lower part of the patient's place according to the length of the pin.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	When the cut is made along the second line of the groin, which is the line of the male genitalia, it should be made with a straight edge that is perpendicular to the white bone.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And remove it, and observe, and keep hold of it for your own safety so that you do not inscribe it; and your excision is the one that you remove part by part that is suspended by the lesser girdle and carefully scrutinize the excision according to the quantity that you can.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And make a wide hole in the white bone, and remove all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And separate the two lips of the cut along the second line, and extend the white bone to the parts below; and do not touch the girdle of the male genitalia, and inscribe the white bone in the hand that you can hold.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And inscribe it completely or in the buttocks, and mainly the lower part, for if you do not scrutinize it carefully, it is not guaranteed that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the girdle of the male genitalia is processed in that place at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the cut of the white bone, return it to its place, and adjust the lips of the girdle of the male genitalia as they were before the suturing, and care for that wound like the others, entering if it is healthy.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the man's heart has become corrupted by another disease, then you should cover those parts that are causing the pain, and remove the heart, and properly care for it as they have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the pain is aggravated in several parts of the body, you know that those are the hernias; therefore, insert the needle in the next position where you made the previous incision; and if it appears to you that it is an operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to remove the piercing, and enter the underlayment lana that is immersed in oil or pink oil; and place another lana that you have immersed in water and oil on top, and expand it over two genitals and the mirror of the stomach; and fold the cloth and powder, and make them like this according to the following form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And if the pressure of the two cloths and their humps of lana carmenada according to this resemblance; and their points are at the ends that are pressed by the thorn or wet lana, and they are added to the structure in the braie of the braies, and the first pregnant at the end of the two, and the second at the end of the pantenilh, and two extramits at two cushions ahead and two more at two gussets, and all the extriction is adjusted in the braie of the braies.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	When some of these artificial hernias are treated with cauterization instead of cutting; and that is, you take a subtle cauterizing iron and insert it into the codon of the gutten, and then light it after they have reported that they have found the white bladder containing water, and you then take cauterization in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It seems like the text is written in a language similar to Greek. Here's a possible translation of the sentence:
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then, it is drilled into that bladder, and it is lit when all the water has been removed.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then, extend the bladder with wires, and scrape it with wires, and scrape the cauterizing iron with the fire; and insert it secondly as close as possible to you when you have eradicated all of it, and keep hold of the fire that does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than an incision operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you have any objection to using cauterization at the time of incision or during cauterization or the infusion of salve, remember that this opposition is for your own good and that the cure which corresponds to this second method is the one that is said to be best.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	When the patient's thigh is painful and they fear the second operation due to its horror, you should administer the following injection as recommended by me; and it is when you certify that you must, for that which has been said about the meanings, that this hernia is harmful.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	You should cover the thigh with any raised cushion, making sure to perforate the abscess in the lower part of the spatulate, and then pause the perforation according to its length on the side of the chest.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if the abscess is wide, I will remove it completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the wound and hold it there, to prevent the wound from getting worse.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And treat that wound after the plague is cured.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	When the pain of the hernia is against the wind in that hour you are perforating it: and this is not done except for that which the white gauze in the orifice of the plague causes contrariety and prohibits the eschar from forming, you should cover the plague with penitence or instrument of the kind by which the hernia is extracted from the abscess, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the oppression of the plague a little.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	You should know that the urine returns, and it is excreted approximately after three months or less; and when it is added, you should be perforated second by that same hand, as the patient will pass those days.
Capitol .lxiii.	The text you provided is not in the language of Latin, Italian,
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	It appears to be written in a medieval form of Latin, similar to the languages you mentioned. However, without more context, it is difficult to provide an accurate translation. The text you
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	It seems that the text is discussing a surgical procedure on a hernia, and there is concern about potential complications. The phrase "dimissio de lu" may refer to the release or removal of the hernia, and the phrase "esser salvat per aquela milhor" could mean "to be saved for that better." However, without more context, it is difficult to provide a more accurate translation.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	It appears that the text is discussing the operation on the hernia and the specifics of the surgical instruments used. However, without more context, it is difficult to provide an accurate translation. The phrase "apostemas" may refer to
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	It seems that the text is discussing the origin of the surgical instruments, which are made from the bones of animals. The phrase "genetius" may refer to the bones of larger animals, such as cattle or deer, while "superfluitat aguda agra" could refer to sharp, pointed bones. The phrase "per percuscio" may refer to the process of cutting or carving the bones into the desired shape for the surgical instruments. However, without more context, it is difficult to provide a more accurate translation.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	It appears that the text is discussing the color of the surgical instruments and how it relates to the color of the bones used to make them. The phrase "es atrobat en lu dolor" may refer to the instruments becoming dark or discolored due to the pain caused by the surgery. The phrase "es
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	When the wound is deeply infected, of which the color is dark and does not heal, it is called an abscess.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some swelling is caused by obstruction of the arteries, and by inflammation of those veins that are already perceived as having a remembrance of the pain, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Moreover, that which is known as inflammation of the arteries is due to the dispersion of the wound when you compress that part with your hands; and it does not matter if it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	However, that which is called inflammation of the veins is not dispersed by any cause due to the compression with your hands.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this side there is cutting and on the other sides; and it is that you insert the key of the generative organs, and extend that of the white blood, and untie the suspensory cords of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensory strings that you untied from the whole part of the parts of the seed.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the blood has already been solidified in those hardened tissues, then you should cover that you are taking out the blood and leaving it inside.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion entering any cause of the cist, or between what is between the bellies, then you should cover that you remove all that adhesion and leave it inside in a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the adhesion is from flesh in the place of the adhesion that is behind, then you should cover that you leave all that is behind in its place and take out the blood as has been said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When you have completed your operation, fill the woolen pledge with red oil and vinegar, and then care for that as for the other cure that has been made when it is healthy.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capital. This is a Latin word meaning "capital" or "principal.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of hernia that is from protrusion.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Protrusion is surrounded by some envelope-like structure resembling a softening of the testicles, and it becomes difficult to perform movement and walking over the thigh.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this disease, there is fear for the cause that was previously remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	The first source sentence translates to: "However, we should speak of operation in the second part where we mentioned the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	It says that you should cover the patient's genitals with a pillow; and lift the testicles to the parts where they belong; and tie the codpiece of the genitalia at the knots that you show on the penis; and hold onto those other servants that you, and extend them vehemently.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And insert your hand through the anus, making sure to go through the transverse section in the right direction, if the rectum is discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And clean all parts of the body that you have mentioned in the extraction of the gallbladder, which are located in the templates.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And fix a needle in that which is a true double hole, and tie it to the first of the places where the vital organs are located, and tie it to another one watched at the bottom of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And insert those into the lower part of the body through a transverse section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is added by the fetid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And cure the plague by curing the other plagues in which you want to be born, and that cause the rectum, which does not have two testicles, to be equal to two, which is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If you suffer from pain in all the joints, it is necessary to cover those testicles or those testicles because they are not nourished by the scrotum due to the incision of the scrotum, and they are fixed, or they are pulled so that they do not become inflamed.
Capitol .lxv.	The text you provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish,
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	However, it seems to be in a language that is similar to medieval Latin and French. Here's a line-
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that ends on the cecum, extended over the abdomen from the inguinal parts of the stomach, so that the intestines of that rupture are at the anus.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture is either of the femoral or epigastric artery, and it occurs due to specific causes: either by trauma, such as percussion, incision, or clamor, or by elevation of a heavy cause, or by semblant.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	When gout occurs due to cold humors that spread throughout the body, it happens gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly, and it is often caused by the intestine entering the abdomen when the gallbladder compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the gallbladder is cut due to gout, it causes severe pain immediately; and various apparent symptoms appear further away from the original point, and this is due to inflammation of the intestine, and the cause of this is the intestine being damaged in parts of the gallbladder.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some parts of the intestine are forgotten by the gallbladder, and this is called the inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some parts of the intestine are caused by ventilation, and some parts of the intestine are in the abdominal cavity and are held there, and there is great concern for the health of the patient, and some parts cause severe pain that becomes more prominent when moved.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the spices of this disease, there is fear that it may be escaped from the wound, because it is difficult to avoid the scar.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The first source sentence translates to: "The hand of the operation for that part commands the patient's leg to be bent at the knee so as to fit snugly into the parts of its cavity, and to have the hands placed over the thighs, and to lift the changes of the intestine.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	When the rib is stretched that holds the testicles in place, and inserts them into the cavity of the body, and then fixes them in place with a stitch in the second pair of labia, as instructed to open the incision; and then covers the edge of the section with another layer of skin.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If the section is larger than what you can remember, then the operation will be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And if you remove those hooks that hold the testicles in place, then the white bone of each part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you enter the said tool into the testicle, into the white bone that is in the cord of the man, and into the second white bone, and release the adhesion that is in the back of the man.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if you remove the cord of the testicles from the parts in front, and extend the white bone on both sides, and lift the man with the white bone to the edge of the section; and command the minister to extend the man further and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind the filled solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When it comes to the belly, it is said that there is no cause for the intestine to be enveloped in the white hard bone.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you suspect any cause, then examine that on the belly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take an awl and insert it into the belly where there is a thick pain of x feet, and enter through that into the cavity of the pelvis, which is below the testicles, which is divided; and then insert the extremities of those that come out when there are four of them, and place them over any figure on the handle of the crotch; and it is said that this is the pelvis from which the testicles have been removed.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then envelop the extremities of the feet and place them over any figure on the handle of the vessel that does not cause any other cause to happen, as from here there is no chance of gangrene cautery.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Then place another vein liament on the other side of the first liament, after three days; and these two liaments will be from the pelvis that has the testicles below the crotch, according to its size, and insert all the remaining veins on the other side in the same roundness, and take it away from you.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And if you proceed to cut into the part of the back that follows the crack of the testicles, then you will find that it runs through sanctity and sanity, as they have said in this treatment.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And apply wool immersed in oil and rest on the plague; and apply the limb that has been recommended (and some white veins are cauterized, which have said the incision of the thighs of flux of sanctity, where several veins fall) and make the limb enter so that if it falls.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the pain of the thigh is slow, then you must drink cold water and rest on that side that falls, as they have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And cure the plague with another care of the plagues inside that is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of ventricular hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia it has not been seen that what was being done was being done in the care of the patient by the surgeon.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing that was done was to say that it is done as they have recommended in the hernia that is done; the which is what you see the ways on the cut over the difficulty of the patient; and you dry in the middle of the environment where the post is made, if the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	After treating the plague according to what has been said, enter and see if it is cured.
Capitol .lxvii.	This appears to be a date, specifically November 57th in the Roman calendar.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some have seen a rupture in the ankles as has been said, and they have opened the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not cause any harm to the intestines in the belly; and if you do, it is rare; and return to its place in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged, a fissure is made in the gallbladder where you place the intestine in the gallbladder; and this happens due to the extension of the gallbladder which is in the ankle as has been said, which causes the gallbladder to extend, and it is softened and the place is opened and it is removed.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery as has been preceded in the story of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some have been cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient places the thighs over the shoulder of the other, and it dries the place of the rupture of the intestines which is cut by the gallbladder according to the quantity of three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	When you have approximately strengthened the white cipher that is inside which is discovered,
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And hold the ray and place it over the prominent part of the chest, and press it against the stomach.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And hold the back parts over the extremity of the ray of the chest, and adjust one part to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And pull the extremity of the ray, and do not insert it into the chest, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause as you will know in the treatment of inguinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And treat that as in the treatment of diseases, and when you insert the wounds, cleanse that and restore the hernia within which it is consolidated; and the chest contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, where it is pushed for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol, Chapter 88.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Visible motions of the cord of the testicles in healthy men are softened by heat, wherein the cartilages that are between those are softened, and the observation of that is facilitated.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When it is necessary to treat the patient who has injured their thigh according to the doctor's order, and has fully extended the limb that was softened over the natural knee; and if you adjust the lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, in the beginning the excess of the softened limb is divided into three or four parts and a fixed suture is made.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And insert between the sutures; and take care for the cure of the other diseases after it is healed and the wounds have closed.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitulum lxxix.
De castracio.	Of Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, mainly because of this reason that I remember to you in this free book; and it is not necessary to remind you of it except by a few hands, one of which is the hand of the doctor when he is entombed in that, knowing the cure of the animal that happens to it; and the other hand is that we have need of castration of other animals for our purposes, as for mules, and for pigs, and for pigs, and for the like of them.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	I say that dissection is done in two ways: either by cutting or by making a slit in sections.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In that which is done by cutting, the way of the operation is to make the beast fall in water with its tail inside, having made it soft and smooth and having hung it.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And hold those by your hand inside them if they are resolved and do not show outside the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In dissection done by cutting and making a slit, you will have the beast and press the girdle of the testicles of the other side with your hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And tie the suspensors, and place them over each hole after one slit between two holes made.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And place those that will have to be extracted.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not let anything over those of the cecum except the subtle cecum which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of dissection is better than that which is done by cutting, for when a deep cut is made, the testicles are affected and the beast wants to fight.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And when the plague is cured, it should be cleaned.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure of gout.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Gout in men is treated with two methods: one is to cut or burn it, if it appears in water that the space between the testicles is enlarged, and in the one that is between the two testicles, a quarter of a female figure appears in the quality of which it is.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some observations have been made on that urine which is in the testicles' cavity.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a specialty: it is that the horn of the woman over the pentile is situated as two testicles of a man, a little lower and to the side, as the horns of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 And the cure is of three species: of two men and one of the women's species.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it seems that you have made those adjustments within which the decay of that is expelled, and that you cure the other plagues with that cure.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	When in the second part of men, where urine is produced, which is in the abdomen of the testicles, there is no cure or operation.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lingering and swelling of the flesh, caused by female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lingering is much increased when the cause is natural and is exposed to examination; and some are magnified in certain women to such an extent that they resemble those in men and spread throughout the body during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	However, you should have the surplus of lingering in your own body or in another's and insert it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not remain in insertion, but rather at the root of the penis, for it does not allow for the flow of sperm.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And apply this cure when cured to those plagues that were cured.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The less flesh that is swollen is the more flesh that is filled within, and it is much more swollen in certain parts than in others; therefore, we should insert it as we insert lingering, and cure that which is cured.
Capitol .lxxii.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in the language you described and does
De curacio de alratica.	This line translates to "Of the cure of gout." In this context, "alratic
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	This line translates to "Gout is that it does not penetrate the female genitalia, or if it does, it is small." In this context, "alratica" refers to gout, and the text is discussing its impact on the female body.
E es o natural o accidental.	This line translates to "And is it natural or accidental?" The text is asking
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	This line translates to "Accidental is due to the fault of that which preceded, and it is made or due to nothing adjusted or to a subtle and small gout." In this context, "accidental" refers to gout that is not a natural occurrence, but rather a result of some other factor. The text is suggesting that accidental gout can be caused by a
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	This line translates to "And it is made or in the prelude of the month, or in the costazes of the month, or in the pus of the month, or in the base of the month, and forbids copulation and enprengagement and childbirth, and very much forbids menstruation." In this context, the text is providing advice on how to prevent accidental gout. It suggests that certain activities, such as copulation, enprengagement, childbirth, and menstruation, should be avoided during the prelude of the month to help prevent gout.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	This line translates to "And the knowledge of that is made by paying attention to the menstrual cycle, if the pregnancy is apparent, prompt; but if it is not apparent, then you should closely watch that with the ties or with the ray." In this context, the text is providing advice on how to determine if a woman is pregnant and how to prevent accidental gout. It suggests that paying attention to the menstrual cycle can help identify signs of pregnancy, and that if pregnancy is not apparent, then close observation of certain body parts,
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	When labor pains are caused by a subtle obstruction, and they occur in the lower abdomen, then you should gently cut and separate them.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And if you place your hand over the lower abdomen, and then pause the ties that indicate the end of the child's head,
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And if the woman is lying on her back, with her thighs extended, and you extend her lower abdomen as far as possible, then break through that subtle obstruction and open the labor pains.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And take some lint and bind it with thread, and place that over the area to keep it moist, and apply it every day until that area is fully consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the obstruction is large and dense, then you should cover that area with something that will not cause inflammation or infection.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	And if labor pains are caused by flesh, then you should suspend that area and apply something to keep it moist.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if they are in pain, then give them the medicine that stops the flow of their menstrual blood, and apply something to keep it moist, and apply something to the album of the thighs.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide-bore catheter for the purpose that the pus will not solidify too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold that part for the joints and administer calcium liquid to that part.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And it will be cured when it has been healed by the other curative process that has been done.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some things happen in the more advanced stages of other animals, and it is necessary to follow this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is for cranial apothecary, the cranial apothecary that is in the head should not be made against the grain of this method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of hematomas, hernias, and red blotches that occur in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hematomas are appreciated of the openings of the veins that are within them and not continuously corrupted, and as they are old hematomas and are causes of pain.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the specialties of those and the sanctions of those, and I direct those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	When those are those that cause pain in the larger wound, those are the ones that have been treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover the female with a large cloth and extend it over the forfexes, or over something else, and insert those into the wounds.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And sprinkle over those dues the fluxes of the plaster of one of the inscissive powders, as it is and seems to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And press the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in warm water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the fluxes of the plaster persist, then make that salve with sumat, scorsas of milgrantas, and similar ingredients.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of ordi and comfy it with honey and if you see that it agrees, make plaster with that water on the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the plaster comes off, it is; and otherwise, make it stick to two ventouses, and to the patient's scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge that in the oil of coliandre or the oil of arnagloza or the oil of guarravier, and if it is painful, make it stick to the place; and cure the place with enguentz when it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that entrance which is safe.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capitulare, Book 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	A surprising occurrence has happened in the intestine.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Special symptoms of abscesses occur in the intestine, such as cracking and abscess formation, ulcers, erosions, and other abscesses, eruptive fever, and phlegmons.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already mentioned these diseases and their special symptoms, as well as the cures for them in each division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And do you ask in this book of abscess what happens in the intestine when an abscess is formed, and if you want to know how the operation of the iron is performed?
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	However, if you consider that the pain of the abscess in the leg begins suddenly with percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it tightens and if you feel that sensation, then do not perform a puncture, but help that abscess as much as possible to help with the maturation of the entrance when the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And you should know that you are making the woman lie down on a pillow that has pillows; and lean back on your side and adjust your buttocks to the part where the belly is, and your thighs should be expanded, and lift your knees away from your chest, and place your hands on your chin, and this will be convenient for you.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife should follow the route and administer the instrument that is used to open the birth canal, in the form which will be useful for those causes that they will perform.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And know when you want to administer this instrument that you have made for the woman's cervix, and be sure that the instrument does not enter more than the cervix and the vagina.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the cervix, you should know that you should put powder on the texture of the cervix so that the instrument cannot enter into the cervix of the woman.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And know that you should stop the string that runs through the instrument of the midwife and that the midwife holds the instrument and rotates the string while the birth canal is being opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the inflammation appears, and it is touched to the chest and neck, and there is sweating, you must cover that with something to prevent the wind from reaching the head of the patient.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the fever is discharged, you must cover that in the bath with a container of olive oil or rose oil containing some salts; and put the thermometer in the arm pit of the patient.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the patient's chest and over the wet wool that is submerged in water in which molds are built.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it will take approximately two days to cure, as that is what is customary for the patient to come in when they are cured.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some of the patient's clothes are washed and their chest is wet with water that is crushed by heat and melted, and in which long-haired Liris or Aristotle's herbs are boiled, and it returns to the cure.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the fever is discharged in the patient's wet clothes, you must cover that the patient has been prohibited from the cure of the fever, as there has been cured by that fever what they have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text is not in a language similar
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in an unknown language or a modified version of one of those languages. I am unable to provide a translation for this text. Please provide a translation or context for the text so that I can assist you better.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a language I can recognize or translate. It appears to be in an unknown language or a modified version of one of those languages. I am unable to provide a translation for this text. Please provide a translation or context for the text so that I can assist you better.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a language I can recognize or translate. It appears to be in an unknown language or a modified version of one of those languages. I am unable to provide a translation for this text. Please provide a translation or context for the text so that I can assist you better.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a language I can recognize or translate. It appears to be in an unknown language or a modified version of one of those languages. I am unable to provide a translation for this text. Please provide a translation or context for the text so that I can assist you better.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When there is a necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to avoid error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	When you are showing the entire figure of those, and which engine is in them for what purpose and has been over it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the point is situated on the heel of the foot according to natural geometry, and that is very hard for the man and is made in that difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of it is weakened, then they make that seal, or have the women hold it, and evaporate the congestion of the man's fenugreek and his old humors.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then enter the mercury between those small and thin spats, or it follows that second time within which water comes to that part which is in her of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman when she desires the foot.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If she does not desire it, then you should know that the woman is crystallized with the mucilage of the ptill and the mucilage of fenugreek in her.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command the woman, the crystal, that it be broken and make a seal on it; and take the mouth of the woman and put in her by hand for an hour, quarter the foot so that it does not become too much.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the more important joints of the foot are forgotten at the beginning, you should gradually reduce those points with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If the intramuscular injection is not obeyed, you should place your hand on a table and lift the leg of the patient, and then carefully place the table on the ground; and the table should be held so that it does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the more important joints of the foot are not turned and the foot is cold, you should insert those and extract the romance from the foot or connect the corset to the side of the patient's thigh, and then that will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the embryo over the patient's feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot is on the patient's feet, you should carefully push those in, and gradually convert the foot small, and gently pull that, and gently take a part of the leg and extend those small by small.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If the embryo is entering between the thighs, you should command that it be expressed, and make that extruded condition, as if God wills, so that it will be forgotten.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If you do not forget that they have recommended, if you return that small part little by little when you pause the second natural figure, that will help you remember and ease the pain.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If you are prohibited from doing that which they have recommended, then use a piece of linen and dissolved gum, and apply it all over the mortar with good percussion, and line up as much as possible the course of the female part, the base of the abdomen of him.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And apply that cream on the skin, when you get the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the points you have left in him are lenificated, then apply his sub-smoking of maitre and sub-pause at that to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When the sub-smoking has been applied for an hour, then apply it on a piece of cloth, and make it swell and extend the mouth of him, and take from that, and press the point pushed below the abdomen of him with light compression, so that the small part will not be forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	When the joint is inflamed, it causes pain in the feet. It is customarily called gout by doctors.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the joint becomes inflamed, you must carefully insert your fingers one by one; and the woman should lie on her side, with her feet lower, and those should be placed on the bed, and then close them gently.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press on the abdomen of the patient little by little, and remove as much as possible that is left in the hernia after it has been prepared at the end of the incision.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the joint is not forgotten, you must hold the patient's feet and move them with great force, and press on that as much as possible over the hip bones little by little until the joint can be placed in the parts desired.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And insert your fingers and push the joint little by little, and command the woman to express that the joint is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Inflammation of the joint while a finger is inserted.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be careful in reducing the hernia, but if you cannot reduce it, raise the woman and make her do that.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it is not possible to proceed, make an incision on the lay, and compress the thighs of the patient with strong force, and appropriately administer liniments that you have and recommend with ointments.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the child comes out, make this cauterization on the belly, and study over the reduction of the mouth, and cut off the second natural figure, and make the woman sternutate and command that it goes in where it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The fetus is described as expanding its legs and the abdomen of the woman is at the second stage of labor.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should hold the fetus' foot and roll that small part over and over again, and it will be easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is done and it has been cut off, and you stop over the abdomen of the woman as they have recommended with oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And when you command her to push little by little, and when she has given birth, make this cauterization on one thigh and command her to be inclined to the right side, and command her to be sternuted; and make that woman sternutate more easily.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the fetus is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the patient has had horrific pain from this remedy, consider it, and then insert your thumb into the second nail that has been inserted within the gland when it is empty.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the nail is hung on the face and neck, then insert that into the belly button, so that it does not stick and will not hurt.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the nail into the parts of the finger that you have paused, and tell the woman to look at her hands, and if she does not forget to remove it as soon as possible, so that God or fate may help her.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	End of the labor pains of many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that many movements of the fetus are natural, and some women have three or four, and it is strange and painful to endure; but this is not due to nature, and I do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are multiplied, one nail, and are separated by ciphac, distinguish those that enter the ligament of each of those and some women have forgotten to remove them as soon as possible, and some have been removed by an unnatural delivery, and some have been left behind because they have not been recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If these pains are difficult to bear and you cannot reach the natural figures that have been described, then care for those parts as they have been reported.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is skilled and can easily and subtly touch the part, it will be facilitated and subtle, and will also be time-saving, and should be knowledgeable about each figure according to the one being prepared for the healing.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that this is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighteenth, and you must now verify that a woman aborts only at the fifth, and another at all forms, which causes pain due to the measurement of the glorious savors.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And it is also important that the midwife knows as much about this appearance as possible, and then she should act accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of extracting the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are treating the dead fet, it is said in the division of medicine and not to be deformed, and you have attempted to use it as an operation, considering that the female is of healthy virtue and not of those accidents by which she suffers loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	You consider that the female is lying on the bed over the left side, and her head is inclined to the east and her thighs are raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	He should hold that part or keep her on the bed so that this does not extend and the extraction of the fet is necessary.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And you wet the mouth of the older woman with oils, humors, membranes, and seed of liver and fenugreek.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And you apply the midwife her oils and humors, and you enter them into the woman's mouth, and you surround the woman's face with the aid of the midwife in the older one, and you locate the place where the teeth are in the fet.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And you choose the appropriate place: then you consider if the fet is prepared to be placed over the left cap, and you keep the teeth in the handles of the woman, or in the collar, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or further in the beard, or in the shoulder of the woman, or in the loci propdas of the costas, or dear the ypocondres.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the treatment is on the feet of the patient, then apply it in the puncture or on the side of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And keep the anus tight and stop the curvature of the intestine in that part which is between the left and right sides of the uterus, and insert the anus easily and leave it in place for as far as possible, and if it reaches the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place and keep the other anus in the appropriate position of the patient, or the third if necessary, so that it is not extended too far, and does not extend beyond its rectum, only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Make sure that the entire operation is done correctly, so that the excretion of the patient is eliminated as it is in the eradication of the disease.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And pay attention to that which is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of the patient is held, then pay attention to the matron who teaches you the details of it and inserts it expertly and revolves it around the part that is held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the part of the foot is forgotten, then make incisions on them and push them inside the location from which they were taken; and do this if the entire foot is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the wound is located under another part of the body and cannot be reduced by cauterization, then cover that area with a cloth; and take it out when all of it is outside, and insert it in the joint of the wound or on the thigh.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And cover that area with cloth on the other wound and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the foot is large, or it occurs in the cauterization process during the incision, or if the mouth of the wound is adjusted at the top, then cover that area with cloth between the spines and cut the head and remove the water, or if that does not happen with an instrument called "alundat," which is shaped like the others in the capital, which is this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And if the foot is large by nature: and cover that area with cloth, or take that area with the "alundat" instrument as they have said; and take out the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is injured and becomes swollen, then the clavicle should be fractured, and you must insert it into the wound, making sure that the humidity present in the chest is drained out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated, and there are no obstacles to opening the head, then you should insert your hand as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the abdomen is swollen or there is fluid in it, then you should cover that opening with your hand to prevent the humidity present inside from escaping.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the wound is on the thighs, then you should clean it and direct it towards the mouth of the patient for easier cleaning.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the chest is swollen and hard, then you should cover that opening with your hand to prevent it from collapsing under the weight of the patient's body, and drain the fluid that runs out into the wound.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are not injured and the head is open, then you should insert your hand into the patient's left side; if the mouth of the patient is closed, then introduce your hand into the left nostril, and draw out that part through the mouth of the patient, and enter it with one or two fingers, and push it out with those fingers.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the child is bitten by a flea due to which it happens to the child, then you cover the mouth with a piece of cloth so that it does not get wet; then apply a few drops of ointment made from warm oily substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow the patient in warming and moistening agents.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the plaster is on the side of the foot, it is possible to apply a drop of ointment: and it should be applied as they have said in the patient's stool.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible to apply a drop of ointment, then apply it in the umbilicus, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure that no other cause is causing dinting of the second finger.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, apply the remedies that have been said for the treatment of fleas that occur in the child's mouth.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If diarrhea occurs, then warm oily substances and apply the other remedies.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have seen a woman in the belly of whom there was a child that had died, and placed over that focus another one that was brought to life, and the dead child was replaced by the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens at some point in life that a swelling appears on the face; and it begins to inflate as soon as the skin is scratched, and then it starts to bruise.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called for the cure of it, and treated it for a long time, and the swelling did not become solidified.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you examined it from some causes of strong attraction, and observed the bone, and passed your hand along the joints, and observed another bone; and you were too astonished to see if there was a bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you examined the swelling, and extracted the bones from it, the female present in the face holes, and had been seen in that way for a long time, corrected by a small piece of bandage.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you did not think it strange, but rather that this is known and helpful for the doctor who uses an artificial bone to treat the patient's ailment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a hernia in which the intestine is pushed out, which has two openings at the extremities of two holes.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this hernia may be covered with a thin layer of tissue, and it can be made of fat or bone.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the latitude of each fist is two dice, and the margin of each is one die, and the longitude of each is a palm and a digit; and in the middle location of two fists, there are two adjustments of those feet, of which the longitude is as long as a palm and a little more, and the latitude is two dice or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are placed inside the mouth of the wound so that it can be opened when you roll over the prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form of this hernia may be covered with a thin layer and a thicker layer:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	When the joint pain is caused by hardness of the bones or cartilage, it is called a "fist" (or "fistula") when it resembles the forceps used to grasp and manipulate objects.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the ends of the fistula, there are sometimes additional parts that are curved like a palm, and the angle between them is two degrees.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open it more, you should place the female over the bed with the feet hanging down, opening as much as possible between the thighs of the patient.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open the hole with the instrument as much as possible according to the amount you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the fistula that fits inside the metron.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the fistula described by ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The way to push it out is by empelling it with the foot.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The way to measure it is by counting the large head.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps at the end, sometimes with curved teeth, and some are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes with teeth like those of a saw that is inserted and counted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Forma de amesidat pauc: This line seems to be a medical term or phrase,
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Forma de unci havent una spina: This line can be translated as "A form of the spine without
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci havent doas spinas: This line can be translated as "A form of the spine with two
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit: This line can be translated as "A form of forceps that closes with the teeth, ensuring that the head of the foot is counted.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit: This line can be translated as "A form of the spine with two ends, where the head is cut off.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Forma de dos espatums latz: This line can be translated as "A form of two sp
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, and when you have multiplied the specifics of that and they are prepared by the artificer, as it is placed in its operation and as it is placed for the men according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	When it comes to those instruments, you must already have them prepared, as the need for them cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	This sentence seems to be in a medieval medical context, possibly referring to the removal of a second-
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is held, you must command the mother to hold the infant's head, and then gently pull back the skin around the mouth and nose of the infant, and if necessary, cut it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if you need to, take a knife and pierce through the cover of the pot and place it on the surface where the mouth of the jar is, like this, as well as a piece of cloth, a rag, an earthenware cup, an aromatic cinnamon stick, and a sacred cassia lignea and saintjohn's wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the knife, and place it on the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a cotton swab in the mouth of the jar, and hold it until the vapor comes to the concave part of the jar.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make that swab smoke as they have said, and the next time it will be forgotten at the speed of the wind.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this cure does not work and you do not want to use it, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil or ointment of sage, and enter that in the conh and wants to see if the second time is found, then take that and extend it little by little until it is annexed in the mouth of the jar, and when you find the second one, extract that small piece by piece according to what the midwife has recommended, and do not force the jar to close.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	When the joint is not moved in the right and left directions, it becomes difficult.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	E if it is properly adjusted in the amount of attraction, so that it obeys and escapes from attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mouth of the child is crooked, we have already recommended the cure for the stunted growth and the medical treatment of the shape of the head.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If not all causes are remembered, it is important to keep in mind that what is said about the mouth of the child lies in the thigh of the woman, and if it is crushed and becomes a terafarmacon; then it will become infected after a few days and will be eliminated and forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	If it is infected, it is from the elevated mouth of the head and stomach, and that leaks the poison; and then it is important to be administered under fumigations and appropriate for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	More than the ancients, it is now treated with fumigations of nitre and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument by which the woman is under fumigation, you must have the retention of menstruation and the second day.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It may be visible or hidden.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	If the end is gently placed at the hearth and the wide end is placed over the fire, then the smoke should be placed over the hearth's bricks.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	Hold onto that entrance until that smoke is consumed and then do another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the cure of a child's non-perforated buttock.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	If the children are not yet born and the buttocks of the child are not perforated, which are already soft and tender.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then cover the midwife who perforates at the said cipher; and if not, perforate it with a sharp one, and keep in mind that it does not touch the snake.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place your hand over that soft wool in vine and oil; and cure that with anointing it within so that it is clean.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is tender, place your hand over the wound for a few days, and take it out when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if the tenderness of the buttock has been consolidated due to plague or cholera; then make sure that this consolidation is firm, and use the cure that we have said about the cure and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	When treating fistulas that are discharging from the body, it is necessary to cleanse them thoroughly and apply an appropriate ointment or dress
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that are discharging from the body are characterized by low-quality mucus and large amounts of pus, which can either come directly from the anus or from the space between the parts.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either a fistula or motes.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if that mucus is old and comes from the white, moist, or subtle humidity, some penetrating worms may be found in those fistulas.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those worms are known to be caused by the cold that exits and the ventilation; and some use the thigh for the exit, and it is more likely to expel those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some worms are found in the space penetrating into the vesica, and entering the meat of the thigh; and some worms enter the joint of the thigh and enter the notch of the ankle.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And what is known about the penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is that you have placed the thin end in the buttocks, and entered it with a subtle tool of iron or steel to treat the fistula when there is no turbulence.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	When you feel a certain tightness, then enter with your fingers or hooves into that subtle spot or hair of the thigh that you feel in the inner part of the thigh.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all, nor proceed with any cause of colic, wind, or ventosity, as they have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and you should take care of the patient.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the vesica or into the meat of the thigh, you know that it is the sign of urine from that place and the prohibition of that in order for that location to be solidified in medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and covering of pain in the circuit, you know that the tightness has entered here if there is no tightness in the bone and pain in the circuit of the part; and that there is an opening at all times; and that it does not belong to this medication, nor is it solidified in enguent.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	When all those fistulas are not cured at once, and the cure of those depends on the skill of the doctors who treat them, it is necessary to rely on their expertise.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In cases where the fistula is not penetrating and not old, it is hoped that a simple salve will be sufficient for you to recommend, and that you have already tried it.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And is that the thigh of the patient is between your hands on the shoulder and raises the changes of you within, the knees are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and approaching try to push or if it is in the fistula tightness, approaching that you know the location where the attempt is made.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the thigh of the patient is around the anus, you know that you should enter the tip of your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the tip of your finger that the attempt has already been made to pierce, or another that you feel between the tip and the fistula or the siphon, you know for sure that it is penetrating; and then you do not need to work on that, as it is not in the cure, as they have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	The first line of the text translates to: "However, it is said that a healthy man in his prime should...
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	When performing the medication for which it is hoped to help him, it is believed that you gently heat the cauterization according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert it into the fistula after it has passed around the wound; and repeat this or three times after you know that all those adjusted and open fistulas that seem like a quill of feathers from the end of the pen are already squeezed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And care for that which is wrapped in a cavity within which it can pass through all those wounds that are closed, and care for that which is medicating the flesh and consolidating it, and if it is healed, then so be it; and if not, do not heal in another time for another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if it enters and does not pass through that which is said to be in the anus, and between that and the testicle that is most made of flesh or fat, and sometimes the fistula in such a way that the surface of the abdomen is exposed, you dry the abdomen from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the testicle is also dried, and it remains in the fistula until the dryness reaches the location where the end of the testicle reaches, and the testicle is released and catches.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	When you clean those fistulous wounds that are assembled like a canula of a needle and not caused by any cause,
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If there is flow of blood several times that comes between you and your operation when you are cutting those flesh, then use the one that is most suitable for cauterization with fire or medical acute instruments, for cauterization with fire adjusts good habits: it is the adjustment of those flesh cuts, and the removal of the smell of excessive humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And if you have to treat those that are wrapped in border or have come through that place, and then treat the plague with hard durable bones that will engender and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in those medicines where they are sterilized and excessive; when restored it is already healed and you do not fear re-treatment.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already gone through the anus of the buttock and is extended from its surface, then enter the water that is in the anus of the buttock and investigate what is there.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if hundreds of attempts have been made and you enter it with a finger or bone, and it leads to penetration, then do not operate on it but second the faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either by cauterizing that area as they have said; or by cutting into that entrance which you can achieve the conviction of the body through which you may enter the adjacent tissues and perform the necessary cure; and do not process for so that you do not incise the ligament containing the thigh, and that happened over the wound of the castration desire; and apply that am to what they have said that fort the body is cured; or by extending that bandage and covering that pus which you cut in that entrance as they have said, or attempt or another instrument of sharp extremity, and cover those fistulas which are in the cutting through the part where you can perforate; and apply effort to make the restoration of the whole plague by cutting, and if the pus does not consolidate, and rampage the umbilical fistula in the part of the thigh, and it will be a larger for the castration.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in every case, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you enter the instrument into the fistula, and around the surface of the body at the level of the thigh and in the margin of the thigh, you hold the instrument with a perforated extremity, which is like a drill for preparing the wound according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	When entering the affected area, enter through one of the five openings or around those; and then enter as much as possible into the fistula that allows you to reach the cavity of the body.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it penetrates into the margin of the buttock, you should remove that piece of intestine that you inserted in the anus; and then remove the end of the intestine and adjust the two ends according to each other, and sew them, and leave them for a day or two, and when the end of the intestine is inside the flesh, sew it at the point where those parts of the intestine are inserted that are between the two ends of the intestine and that cause pain.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And when the plague is cured, if it has been consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any manner that you are prepared for, except that it should be in the pre-on, where it is not for you to do this because it has not been penetrated; and then make amends for that once it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spur of the thorn that is used to treat the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, because it does not enter as much as necessary, so that it is not harmful, you can do it as many times as needed.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	When stitching up hemorrhages that run through the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	When the second pair of nails is removed, it seems as if they are made of charcoal, or perhaps they are similar to those made of fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those small and large ones, and that the sauce correlates with those times and is one, and the movements, and the outside of the buttocks, and at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are on the buttocks are different from those in the months of little humidity, of which the sauce is aquamarine or a small amount of sanctifying oil, and is followed by the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is giving the buttocks is that you command the thighs to relax and express themselves within which the buttocks become relaxed and the nails appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you close and suspend the nails or those that you have in your own hands, and pay attention to those with their own razors.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the nails are not held by humidity or softness of the nails, then pull them with rough or sharp or laced with hair, and extract them from the wounds, and place them in the wounds some powders that are scattered at the cauterization point; or cauterize them after having been preceded by cauterization at the top of cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cares for those who are healed when they are well.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey excretion, then cut it and make it like that of gout, and wash it with that water that is in the bowl and that obeys excretion more gently when the anus is relaxed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the menstrual flow is deformed, its cause is lighter, and it is that you grasp those with your own hand or with your thumb, or with those, and then care for them, and wash them with that water that has been said when they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have inscised them, know that you must make a suture of them later with this hand: take a good needle and enter it into the hole and extract the menstrual flow from the parts above, and make it penetrate into the hole of the other part, and wrap the extracted parts of the needle in the part behind the hole, and stretch them longitudinally; and stitch the menstrual flow to the strong structure, and make sure to not leave the needle inside.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. When it is healed, cure those parts that were injured or incurably diseased within that part which is now healthy.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of curing fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Wounds that ooze occur due to the excess of the fistula or from the constraint of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and not valuable in that medicine, you know that those parts are affected by the point of the puncture or by the tunica within which the wet humors are situated and are hostile to those secreting pus, which prohibits their consolidation; and then cure them when they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	You must keep those parts in mind that are raging with pus, which is entering and drying them out; and then cure them when they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	This is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	This sentence is in Latin and can be translated to English as: "You know that aloe vera is closed, and it is not if not seen red on the color of the body like a clavicle, and it is found in all the body and mainly in the feet and toes, and therefore for that pain you must have the anatomy.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	When it is necessary to close this that is in the circuit of the lock, and to hold it with the pliers or with one's hand, and to remove it from its place; and take care of that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, make a point on the following part in the capital.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Small warts are an elevated, rough, circular opening on the surface of the skin, and more visible in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	To treat it, spread or insert it there, or cut it with what is clean or with the inside that contains it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, make a point according to what has been said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the evil and good spirits are removed from you by the instrument that I show you.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Small mites are an elevated, rough, or gross opening on the surface of the skin that continues in the preon, and when the frog attacks it appears to bite like a termite, and is made around the skin.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	To treat it, grasp a needle of wood or of bone, and hold it firmly, and place it over the spider inside which it contains the circle of the canula; and take care to revolve your hand over that which is inserted there and in the circuit of the spider, and place it on the flesh of the preon, and remove the spider from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, make a canula of iron or steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	When the part of the canula is touching subtlety, quietly (not pierced), wrapped around it that over the same thing the learning of the body is uncovered and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you wish to cauterize the ant after it has been cut, as is said in the cauterization of the thigh at the tip of the cauterization instrument.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner that I administer the instruments to give cristers.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some cristers are made of silver or lead, or are melted or ground; and some cristers are made from those small instruments, which are then made larger according to the ones that are administered in the treatment of small children's wounds, and if the ends are rough or ragged, the cristers made from those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small cristers:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the cannula of the patient is where the bag is fastened, and in this manner, it is fastened differently each time.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the plug that has been left, which is inserted into the belly, is narrow (not cut) by the knife, at most subtle; and on one side of the latex there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track is according to the size of the rays and a small one is inserted.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	If the pouch in which the animal's bladder or lamb's wool is placed, and the handle of the tool is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	When a wound is made through the flesh as it turns; and if the space within the wound is the largest part of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And if you enter into those wounds as far as they are deep and wide, or encircle them; and adjust a bag; and when you have placed it in that bag, be careful to fasten it at the head of the crystals between two distinct parts of great strength, and cristate each of those thorns: The quality of cristaling each of these is what you fill the bag with, which is scaled according to the tolerance of the wound; and remember that it should not be too long nor too thin.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And if the wound is placed on the side of the body, and raises its limbs up and holds a pillow under them, and unties the cauterization from the olive oil or albumen of honey or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and enters that into the buttocks for ease, and the minister takes the bag and expresses more and as it is emptied in the bowel that is in the crystals, and removes the crystals and the wound takes its limbs to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine forces it to become inflamed, hold it as much as possible; and if you doze off for a whole night, it will be less damaged in the long run.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you christen that in the cures of diarrhea of the stomach and the inflammation of the thigh, then you will repeat the cauterization when it is healthy.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or fissures, then you should be the christian most subtle and leon-like among them, of those whose criteria the children will follow.
De curacio de las plaguas.	In the cure of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And you have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what was suitable for the free, and you say so that the cure of those who are more and medical is according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, say that the plagues are divided according to what they are pains and according to the location where they are found.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which you see that the plagues are pains are such as gout, or incision of the skin or of the chest, or percussion, or thrusting, or cutting, or semblance to those of the causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The following line by line translation of the given medieval medical treatise is as follows:
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	When you are recommending the cure for some diseases, based on that reasoning and rule for other diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you begin with the simple headaches, where the reminder of the compounds comes at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, when you encounter a simple headache in the head that is not fractured, you should consider: if it is due to stones or a mimic, and the joint has already trinqued, and it is only a great pain and there are concerns about the malady of apostema caut, then you should touch the head as much as possible, and do not delay; and extract from the side of the sanc as soon as possible, according to the quantity of the virtue of that one if no other cause prohibits fleubotomy, mainly if it is the one that has given out of the disease it is few.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is the opposite fleubotomy of the diseased part; and keep the malady of repletion and of vomiting and of large gastric worms.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If there is any prohibition of the minimum, then you should be less eating and not approach flesh or blood.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	When you stop over the wound, if there is an attack of apoplexy, let cotton soaked in rose oil or vinegar be applied to it.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of apoplexy, stop over the wound, if it is recent and the air has not changed, use that powder that I recommend in small amounts.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has already changed, stop over the wound after it is clean.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or has an incision and does not have well-fitting lips, adjust those sutures according to the sutures I recommend.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already been discovered by the bone and penis, and there is no tightening of the thighs except for a small suspensory, you should open that wound and treat it with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the thigh to be cut into sections according to those veins where the meat grows: caps and form like them, within which there is flesh.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If the joint becomes degenerate and does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all around it and remove it, and then treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these plagues an artery or vein of the kind that carries blood from the intestine can occur, and it is not cut off by doctors, then you should investigate the artery, and if it is not cut, you should cut it at that point; and if this causes pain to you, then you should cauterize within that point when it is cut.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, the cause of them is legitimate; it is not certain that you should powder over those powders, but rather that they become solidified at those points where the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the recipe for the powder is as follows: a mixture of olive oil taken from one part, of dragon's blood taken from three parts, and all thoroughly cut and ground, and over that the plague is filled, and it is held together by good constriction, and it is coagulated on the surface of that, and it is bound to the vein.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then apply poultice to that part with powder and wrap it around, and do not let it slide while the patient is lying down, so that the medicine does not come into contact with the wound.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And if any of you have alone cauterized, when you are not in my presence and I am not there to sanctify with dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is already performed on the largest plagues when it is necessary to place it over them and keep them straight, and recent plagues of the same kind, where the air has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered it, and especially during summer, you will not see the position of this powder, nor cure those who have said that you place it over those engorged parts or over those pores of the flour of the other water and honey after it is prepared; and this cures those in another cure after they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if you happen to have a fractured bone in the leg and it is small, then you should remove that part with this method.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	When you tell the care of the fractures of the head due to gout.
De las plaguas del col.	When plagues of the colon are present, it is necessary to apply remedies that can
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague occurs in the colon, there is no difference in treatment, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the colon are already involved or the artery, then the nerves are affected only that it is necessary to avoid surgery because of the severe stitching that causes, as zinc and sage that are used to sew those that do not have nerves and contract like them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not pause on the cause of all flow, because the substance of the nerves is fluid and the continuation of it is in the brain, which is pulled from all parts of the body.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is treated with improper medicines, then see how the water is caused, some infused in olive or not olive, and thick when it is washed with water and the other parts are minded according to this manner, and it is found to be humid.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the plague is large, then administer suture or cut the lips of it, and afterwards treat that when it is cured.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	When the plague is deep or occurs in the lower part of the incision, then one should perforate that in the location that is less painful.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	When the plague has already cut an artery and there is a flow of blood, then one should separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if it is necessary to provoke such.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	When the plague has already cut the vertebrae of the spine or the entire thing, and the veins of the collarbone are saved, then one should adjust the edges of the coat over the collarbone of the plague and not touch that; then equalize that and reduce it over its natural figure, and stretch it decently, and leave it there for a while; and take care of that in those places where it is stitched and excited, so that it remains healthy.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	When the plague has already cut into the bones, then one should perforate that, and if in it there are fragments of them, extract all that you can from them; and what is not visible to you, leave it inside when the plague is healed, and separate it and the eggshell of it is alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the plague is recent, you should powder that powder that I have recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the plague there is an abscess, you should treat that with the remedy that I have recommended to you, which will come back to the capital part.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plague of the colon or similar when it occurs between the spines and is caused by a hard, soft, long, or small one.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of the spine or cotyle, and sometimes of the depth, you should consider if the plague has ventilation when the thigh is clean; you know that the plague is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in it there is no depth and the plague is recent to the main part of the hour, you should pause in it with the first powder, and do not strain that because it is not the sanctuary retained in the depth of it and that returns to the core and that does not affect the thigh, but pause in it attracted, and leave it to the visible days of the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the engagement is not at your present, you should pause in the orifice of the plague with enough powder because it comes out that water which you have; and make the thigh sleep over the plague so that it runs that water which is in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the plague has passed three days or more and no spasm or tremor of the heart or stricture of the gut occurs, and sometimes other good positions for the patient, you know that the plague is safe; and then care for that one with pains and the other cure when it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the cure of the patient is excused and it has been done many times, you know that a fistula has been made; then care for that one with the capital head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the plague is due to compression of spasm or of the chest, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or of the back, you know that this one should be cared for before suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If the plague has already made an impression on the bones and you know that the patient has been compressed with presses, you should tighten the plague and extract those presses if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, you should loosen the presses that are caked with the plague, as the extraction of them is difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	When other diseases occur in other parts of the body, the treatment for this is the treatment that has been called gout.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of stomach diseases.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disposition that occurs in the stomach is either large, small, or intermittent.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the large ones some veins and nerves of the intestine or hernia are felt, for which an introduction is made with them and a suture is made to be sharp and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small dislocation is difficult to be done by another hand, and if it is found that the reduction of them is difficult, then do not hesitate to introduce them into their place as much as possible, because they are easily engorged and the insertion of the thread is difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And the better dislocation is intermittent, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the special cases mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You know that the suture of the stomach is second to four hands, and fewer sutures are common that are suitable for sutures of other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two other sutures are used to communicate with other plagues, but not in the abdominal suture itself.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you every examination and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the disease is small and occurs due to a cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then you are in one of two hands: either because of the small tear caused as they have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when it is swollen, you know that you should cut this in such a way that you submerge it with a wet sponge from the body alone, or that you soaked it in water, and cyperus, and spike, and embrocation, and apply it to the intestine when the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some people have seen that this is better when the water alone is used for resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation being resolved, you hydrate the intestine with water in which it was cooked with herbs such as galingale, malva, and marshmallow, so that the intestine is alleviated from its cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the intestine of the patient is not obstructed in this treatment, then you should cut the disruption with a small sharp instrument that has not been used before.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first source sentence translates to: "The first dressing is better when it is not too tight and does not cause discomfort, and is not an occupation for picking or removing necessary items.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	1. "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	2. "it occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	When the plague is amplified and comes out of the belly, you should know that its reduction should follow the shape of the natural body in its proper place, if possible over there, so it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide and occurs in the lower part of the abdomen, you should cover the patient's chest with the blanket and lay them down on their side, keeping their hands close to their face; and if it occurs in the lower part of the stomach, you should hold the patient's head and place their feet on the blanket.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	If the disruption is in one of the two parts of the stomach, you should pause your attention and consideration until you know for sure which part is affected so that the other part is not affected as well.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And it is necessary to administer this remedy in both large and small pains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small pains, pause what you have prepared and make sure that the minister is between your most important parts, holding the disruption in place with all his strength and adjusting the lips of the patient, and then descend from there to where it was and cause another one if necessary.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture method: one that you grasp with your thumb, according to the size of the pain; and let it out at the end of the disruption of that ring, and pull the thumb tightly, or else you will not keep the ends of the chain in the correct position, at the ends of the colon that you leave the chain on the parts of the belt, before you pierce that part; and you have already added the ends of the chain and the ends of the colon, and then make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	When the double string is tightened around the pulley, and some of the ropes are cut into parts, and then the lips of the holes are added for addition's sake; and then the size of that is laid off on another pulley, and it is fixed in place as if it were the first one, and you do not stop doing this until all the contraction of the plague is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the holes are more precise between coarse and subtlety, four of the subtle holes slightly penetrate the flesh; and the large ones are difficult to fit into the codpiece, and therefore it is necessary that they be both precise and large.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the hole be placed at the extremities of the codpiece, because if the flesh is not slightly penetrated and the plague is exposed in front of its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the stitches are not prolonged so that the plague is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And slightly insert the ends of the holes so that they do not cause the patient's thigh to ache; and place your hand over the expanded stitches of all parts, which hold the ends of the holes; and remove them as soon as you know that the plague has been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	This is the translation of the first line:
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second source sentence translates to: "Then make the second suture: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, from the spine and both ends of the cyst, in one direction, with a needle in which there is a fine thread that unravels in subtlety and size.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle of that metal part from which it began, so that the true cage catches the subcutaneous part that was previously opened, so that the suture is the next suture of drap am the quality of that which strengthens the draps so.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the amount of the large of that certain metal.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch boasts men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch cures the plague that was infected in a man in the right abdomen, which was infected by a cat, and was the rupture of the plague of a palm, and was herniated from the two palms of the intestine of the member, and was the disruption in the intestine of the member; and then you reduce that which the bowel had suffered the plague for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and was cured that which was sick, and was healed; and after that it becomes quiet for many years, and is discussed in its own positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	When the other doctors had failed to heal them; and by miracle, for that one I could not cure, who was in a place where there was no atrophy nor any medicine, only pause over the plague cot which had two veins on that day and frequent urination, as soon as the focus was healthy.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May I tell you two types of suture from another story in Parola?
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And is that you understand about suturing the umbilicus, and entering the hole from the edge of the wound to the end of the dent?
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And how the needle penetrates into the umbilicus and through the cartilage, and along the entire length, and leave the end of the navel where you entered the needle; and then let the other end of the needle go through from the edge of the wound to the other end of the dent.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then make another one at the other end of the wound in the dent of the edge; and leave the exit of the navel that is in this lap, and let the needle go through the hole from the other end of the dent to the edge.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When the penis is inserted into that which it is meant to penetrate, and that which it is meant to penetrate is at the end of the vagina that is in the part of the body where it should be, then it has fully penetrated.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then, starting from this side and going to the other end of the vagina, extract the needle from the intestine that was inserted, and then return it to its original position in the intestine; extract the part of the intestine that was extracted from this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Then make another hole and another, and make another hole inside of which you cut everything that is deformed according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this suturing is that you cut the epithelium that cuts the hair, in other words, that you cut the vagina with a hole in the end of the intestine, and that you see the other hole inside of which the clitoris is completely filled.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of suturing is that which Gualia describes, and this is for the purpose of the patient and according to the doctor's advice, that you cut the other half of the vagina that the doctors cut in another part, in other words, that you add all parts to their natural part, and they apply the end of one side and the end of the penis to the other side, and that is what you should follow according to my advice.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have placed the needle at the tip of your thumb, in the same direction as the incision you made on your own part, and let it pierce into the denticle in that spot, and see two ends of the cipher; and then rotate the needle and make it pierce from the fornacle to the denticle at both ends of the cipher.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	When you turn those parts, and let each of the parts that are being penetrated enter the opposite part in two extremities of the mirror, which are not in the same direction as the Latin.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This suture is better than the common suture, and it is the suture that precedes the reminder.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Guillermo.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	If it may be that the doctor has not explained this to you, the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you enter through these in each one with a needle, and then start with the intromission of the needle that you must use, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those that cause the engagement of the hands.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	You know that when there is a disruption in the lower part of the abdomen, it is difficult to perform the suture of the intestine compared to other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medical treatment for the plague is judged by the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	That which causes it to be recent when you can obtain the plague in the presence of the sacred sand that the air alters there, and reduces the intestines and colons of that kind and makes them suitable for that decently, then stop on that earth-like powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has already altered the plague, then stop over the area that appears which cause hard stones and close the fissures, and they become solid and visible; and care for that plague as if it were the cure of other plagues when it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the presence of medicines, stop over that area, and when it begins to get wet, cut a piece of cloth, a coat, and change those two veins each day, as you have done and shown, when the plagues are simple. And you will not need another medicine in timely dispositions when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague communicates injury to the main members, then cover that with wool dipped in tempered olive oil or rose oil, and place it in the circuit of the loci which are between the ankles and behind the knees.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, then every day observe that, and if the stitch becomes black and the purulent exudate comes out through the intestine and enters the cavity of the confluence, then...
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You know that the one who is about to give birth is in need of more medicine than the one who is giving birth to a small child.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult medication for the intestine which is called "gout" to not receive any plague that comes into it; and this is because of the great number of veins that are in it, and because of its size, and because of its subtlety of shape, and because of its proximity to the natural nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If this is the case that you are proceeding with the plague, and you achieve the desired result, then return to your own method which reduces the intestine's constriction.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed some time and you have already done well or not, then know that what you stretch over the place that is being disfigured by the intestine, for which the blood comes out of the veins and arteries in the skin, is because of the plague.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And you have to insert that there is another limb, and stop the extremities of the thread until the end of the plague's exit, so that over you is alleviated the attraction of the plague because of the closeness of the skin and the emission of the plague's brace.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	This is a memory of the diseases that happened in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be repaired in some people, because it has been seen that the one who had the disease in the stomach was percussed by a staff and was the plague of the part of the stomach, and the plague was an old one and made a fistula, and it was also a sign of the management and vitality.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then, if you have already cured the disease, it does not matter if it was not cured in the hospital, and I stopped with the details of that which has been made hot and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you say that I have seen the place already consolidated, then cover the thigh with a cloth over the accident of mal in the stomach; and do not encounter any lack of mal accident and rumors in the mouth of its disposed holes eating and drinking, and then enter bath and exercise in your speech.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And it has been told to experienced patients that when the disease occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be liated according to this method: and it is that you take large pills; and then adjust the lips of the plague and stop one pill of those that are over the lips of the plague; then when you take them over and stretch your mouth, the cap of the pill adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then pause another type of fly for the first time, and do not stop until you have made as many flies as the total number of the plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce that and see how the plague is; and look at those attached to the intestine when the intestine is healed, and do not harm the thighs.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it may be that the intestine is visible with a thin thread which is made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, because it is more in the needle; and it is that you hold the end of this intestine, and it is a waste, and reduce the end of that intestine thread, envelops, and enters that thread into needles and into that intestine, and reduces it in disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this type of stitching with flies is not the only way of confidence and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thighs, then do not cut too much, and do not heal completely, and do not harm the thighs.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	When treating a wound or fistula, it is important to follow proper hygiene practices to prevent infection and promote he
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	When a wound or abscess becomes infected and does not heal quickly, and does not rupture completely at any time, it is commonly called a fistula and is referred to as such in any part of the body.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula is often characterized by being firm, white, and painless, and it does not change in shape like the pain of a wound; and for that reason, that part is called an alvus, which is the cause of the pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in a fistula, the part that gets sore is wet; and soon the wetness is absorbed in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some of this moisture is thick, and it is scant, and it is rough.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division that when wounds are not healing or are not healing in their natural state, it is due to one of several causes: one is a lack of sanation in the flesh; or it is due to malice towards the body; or there is something between the body and the labia that is hard and not naturally present in the flesh; or it is due to watery secretion; or the ulcers themselves are poisonous and the matter that comes into contact with the ulcer's surface is of bad quality; or the medicine is not appropriate for the healing of the wound; or when corruption has settled in the region, and it is a pestilence; or due to the nature of the region as it is in Saragossa, where it is difficult to digest the maladies, and it is delayed in the treatment of abscesses for natural reasons; or there is one, or multiple bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When all causes have been shown, and the symptoms of those causes are treated by the physicians in their division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I ask you to tell me what treatment is given for fistula, which is made through surgery by the physicians in their division.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	I know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body, and four of those are fistulas that reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the celiac, or the bowels, or the vesica, or to any part of the costal cartilages, or to any part of the spinal columns, or to any part of the joints composed of cartilage from the knee and foot; and those that cause proximity to the main member and similarity.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And for those of these fistulas that follow this method are those of difficult cure, and do not receive treatment, and the physicians occupy themselves with it and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas has a depth that does not reach those places that I have said, and you expect and trust in the cure of it, and you want to know its nature, then try to close it with iron or copper, and if the fistula follows correctly, and ask about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, investigate that which is gently pressed under that subtle plum, for four plums are needed for the levitation of the heart's course and to curve the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has not had horrible symptoms, it is not possible for you to understand about the am torta.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then, Christians the wound with your wounds, for the humidity by which you cleans the one wound is needed by the others to cleanse and heal them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And if you inquire very carefully, which hand it is possible for you to know if you have bones or nerves, and whether the cavity of the long or short fistula is open, or if it is a fistula that has caused your wound and is above all the strength of your body, the strength of your entrails, which enterinthe abdomen, and the victory over pain depends on the compression of the hand over the place, and the understanding and the causes of the accidents in the apothem.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have been on all those causes, you will see the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula or if it is in its place, long from joint, or from nerves, or from arteries, or from veins, or from one of the parts which you say you have and tell.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you wet the fistula after it is said to be due to the narcotic of the patient, and take care that it does not pass through that filtration and through decayed cartilage, and that it is not born in the birth canal or from the thigh or semblances, and cure that part which is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long depth and is following the rectum, then you should cover it as much as possible with your own body until you can do so as much as possible, and modify all of your corrupt cartilage; and administer wrapped cold medications in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the conviction of the fistula that you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And use some of the sharp medicines that the cold medicine corrupts all that is inside which is in the conviction of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And restore those that cause the production of healthy cartilage within which is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not cured by this, then you should cauterize that according to what has been recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is known and you must certify that, you should inquire about it and dry the area that has been recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as they have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bones are discovered and found to be blackened with corruption, then you should immediately treat that part where the corruption is located; and afterwards, care for that area as follows:
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If the bone does not heal and becomes stiff as before, you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you should examine it again and carefully make the reason for it known, and restore it with the same fortifying tie.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it heals, well and good; but if not, you should know that the corruption is deep in the long distance of the body, which has not been able to be treated, and then there is no help for it except to lay down that one.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bones are only slightly corrupted, or if it is possible to remove that part, then you should know that you should remove it with fine forceps as follows:
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if those bones are the only ones that are affected, then you should carefully make the extraction of all of them, and there will be no cause for concern about your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If you have any opposition to any cause of cold humors, and if there is no fear or mistake in their insertion, then insert those limbs or bones where they are, and smooth the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to sharpen the bones of your time, then place your hand over the blood that is flowing from it, and leave it inside that which is within the environment of those bones of limbs and limbs, and keep the blood that is not yet consolidated, and strengthen the cut that you have made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear it, place your hand over the submerged cotton in olive oil, or the submerged cotton in Egyptian anguish, or on the neck of those who are separated from the ablation, and when the limbs are separated, and the bones are separated from the ablation, and the attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If you have a great bone that is like the bone of a camba or a thigh or an appendage, and that part of it is corrupted by the face of it, then you should reduce that am resistance only by entering that which is left inside that neck and corruption, and proportionately restore the blood.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	When the body of a person is corrupted to a great extent, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely within the location where the corruption has pervaded, and then care for that within which it has become solid.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	I advise you to attend to a man in his bedroom so that you can pause there and assist me with my operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of approximately xxx years old had an injury in his thigh, and there were many bad parts on the material of the leg that was permeated by the material of the thigh, and it was a large gangrene, and I did not consider this as an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I extended the time for that due to the error of the doctors who had made it, and the materials were corrupted, and the cure was paused when the cushion was made, and some are placed in those parts which all get perforation and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the treatment was multitude of doctors around for two years, and they did not know in those times what I knew in the art, when you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	When I saw the girdle of the patient and the materials that ran from his wounds through great cavities in his body; and all of this man's body was completely intact and his color was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the tentacle into one of those wounds and the tentacle reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I carefully examined all of the wounds and found that they all reached the bone.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I touched and placed my hand over one of the wounds that I had entered, and I discovered a part of the bone, which was rotten and corrupt, and it was already corrupted in the girdle that had penetrated into the meat.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I considered that this was discovered and prepared by the bone discovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you concluded that it was not in the bone but rather that corruption which had separated and hidden, and you had already fallen.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I paused the restoration of the plague by the long-term, non-consolidated medical methods.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And you should rub over the bones afterwards after discovering the first sign, and continue to corrupt the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I hold that this corruption is from that treatment, and you should do the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discovered another sign and did not stop inserting the bones one by one particularly, and perforated the restoration of the bone, but it was not restored until I inserted my palm around the marrow, extracted it from the marrow, and restored it with medications, and it became solid and healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to repeat the operation and section of the body except for the disposition of the intestine and the low tolerance of the small intestine and colon, which caused an accident in all hours due to superfluous evacuation of bad sinco.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And it is healthy through whole healing, and there are no hard bones; and the disposition of the body is good in the human form and returns the virtue of the body; and it is conversed about its dispositions and no harm is done in ambulation or in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If you are sitting on the chest, cover that second manieyra: and it is that you grasp the liament and stretch it at the extremity of that sitting, and command that it be extended in the extension of the liament; and pause the liament with a piece of the first liament; and lay the liament over the flesh that is left of the chest, and extend the extension of it so that the flesh is drawn to the parts left, and you discover the flesh on the location that you wish to suture so that the suture does not draw the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When you are ready to take the patient's temperature, please ensure that the thermometer is not in contact with the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And if the thermometer is placed over the corrupted part little by little, until it is in the concavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear on its appearance at the touch, and then continue to tighten the other seen one.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, then continue to cut a part on the other, and the corruption is at the end of the body or in the part where it was cut; and place your hand away from it, and then take the thermometer of the first part that is the corruption when the squeeze of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the squeeze is on the location of the corruption as small as they have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is in the joint, insert the other corrupted joint, and tighten the bones that are continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of several joints, you will not be in this reason but to engage.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If corruption is in the nipple of the breast or foot, it is very difficult; but you should inquire into the corruption in what manner it appears to you, and remove it, and adapt it to each subsequent disposition that is possible for you, and make it as right as you can, when it does not oppose your veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You know that the instruments and the way to insert them into these bones vary according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their fineness and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you may prepare for all kinds of operations the appropriate instrument.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You know that this operation means something to you about the specific of the instrument you indicate; when you have great knowledge and long experience in handling such tools, and testimony of having handled similar cases, where you have learned what is convenient for each tool in the entire disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should form in the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use, according to their simplicity and those that you will proceed with in your operation, and the experience that you will have on others.
Forma de serra:	The first line of the text is not in English, but it appears
Forma de autra serra:	to be a description of a tool or instrument. In medieval medical practices, a
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de serra" translates to "shape of the saw" in English
Forma de autra serra gran:	This line seems to continue describing the shape of the saw, but without more context, it's difficult
Forma de ray:	to provide a precise translation. However, "ray" in
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	form of the star-shaped lock, and the points of it are like the points of the hinges." This line suggests that the saw has a star-shaped head and its cutting edges resemble those of a hinge.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	However, it does not seem to make sense unless the saw is used to cut the joints' heads when they are rotten, or if the mouth is very wide." This line seems to be explaining the purpose of the saw and the conditions under which it should be used.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma de razori major dels auters" translates to "shape of the larger razors of others.
Forma de razori menor:	Forma de razori menor" translates to "shape of the smaller razors
Forma de razori lat:	of others." This line seems to be continuing to describe the shape of different types of raz
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	of another joint pain, it is made with an arc of the length of the push and the sharpness of the iron, and the member of the boy's hand is made to be less severe." This line seems to be describing the process of making a saw for treating joint pain, using an arc (or curve) made from the length of the push and the sharpness of the iron, and making the member (or handle) of the saw smaller for the boy's hand.
Forma de lu:	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a recognizable language or format. It seems to be a mix of different languages and symbols.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	When it comes to the end of bones and the tightening of joints.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends of bones can be affected by intrinsic or extrinsic causes, and if you have medicated for that corruption without relief, sometimes the corruption reaches the member that does not suffer from any cause, and you inscribe that member into this honor to avoid mortality or malice that is greater than the defection of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens, is that the member becomes black inside because it is that which is being burned, or it can be placed properly at the blackness inside that enters that member which takes hold of the whole body and that holds everything; and then you inscribe this to that member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And it seems that the cause of the corruption is the collision of some poisonous causes, such as those of the sting of a scorpion or of a rattlesnake or of a wasp and similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the collision is at the end of that, you inscribe it and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	When it comes to accessing the womb, you should insert your hand into that part of the uterus, and do not leave any space for corruption to enter when you grasp the femoral artery in the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If it is not possible to do that, then insert your hand into the arm within the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If the corruption passes and surrounds the joint, then in that case the death of the patient is certain; and if another cause or treatment is given in sufficient quantity, it will be beneficial for the cure.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When corruption occurs on the foot, as described earlier, you should insert your hand into that part within one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you grasp the sole of the foot, then insert your hand into the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If possible, enter the denial and insert your hand into the joint of the denial.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has already spread over the denial, then in that case there is no other choice but to release or dismiss it, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The tool for inserting the member or clamping it is that you stretch the limb in the area where you want to insert it, and stretch another limb over the location; and extend the minister over the parts, and extend another minister in its; and you separate the flesh that is between two limbs in the same cut as when it is discovered, and apply it or clamp it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When it comes to covering the patient's body with clothing, make sure that no part is left uncovered and that the dressing adjusts well to the injury and does not cause discomfort.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If you happen to encounter blood from the wound while working, then you should cauterize the affected area or place some powders on it that restrict the wound; and return to your medical practice when it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And link the affected member to a convenient part, and treat it accordingly when it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I recommend that you go to a man in the country, this accident that happened to you and to me, which we both recommended, was adjusted to the negro in the country according to the arrangement that was made for combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption occurred first in the country, when it was decided to take all the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for his wounds, which were very severe, and he rushed to the member with great vehemence because of the pain and the adjustment of the intestine, and he entered into the joint, and the fire was cured.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	After some time, that accident happened to you with that corruption in the said member of the left hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then you won, and I was perforated to reflect that superfluity which I placed over the medicine of the hand, according to its mundification; and it does not reflect the superfluity and begins to go to another member that began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	When I entered the patient's room, and I did not intend to make any observations about the superfluity of that superfluity, and moreover, you must not fear that I will make an incision in the patient's chest, because the virtue of the thigh was over cazement.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	I thought that the patient would die, but he returned to his bed and came to me, saying that I had prepared him and made an incision in his chest, and he was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have related this story only because I am an assistant on this matter, and it is significant for the quality of this disease, and it is meaningful according to which it is meaningful and following which it is done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the cure of the sinus and the quality of the clisterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in the flesh of the thigh and the space of the abscess is extended within which it collects filth, and it bursts and perforates and expels the filth, and the place where it was is made as if it were empty, and the cover that is removed from it is like fine thread, and no corruption is found in the bone or nerve or limb, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	When however the space is extended within which corruption presses on some member, it is called an abscess and we do not know.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure of the abscess is to make incisions according to that codex, and especially when it becomes more subtle and turns into a thread, and conforms to the place where corruption occurs, without sticking to the location.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the codex adheres and that corruption does not occur due to subsequent consequences, and if there are many faces in the codex, then treat that with antiseptic.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And do you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that you use has a good odor, then you antisepticize that with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and vinegar and agrees with parts received in parts, and are adjusted in a container, and are placed over the focus within which the medicine is fused and pervades a certain part of the melt.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and antisepticize that sinus, and stretch the orifice of it, and place the medicine in it according to the number of hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	When the pain is removed from that part of the body; and it takes several days to enter when the sinus is softened and the flesh is swollen.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	If some wounds are cauterized with coal when you are not present to give this medicine; and it is that you take the coal from the fire, and put over the water; and then close that and cauterize it within that when you confess that this sinus hardens.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the thigh does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the coal water, close that wound with the coal water and mix honey with it, and close that wound with the honey mixed with water, where four parts of water are added to the melted and washed honey, and the sinu adheres to it, and particularly when it has superfluity of stipitation and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you cauterize some wounds and confess that the sinus is already softened, close that wound with the water that makes it softer in that.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take from the gallbladder and dissolve that olive oil or rose oil and see stiptic; or that you clysterize that oil with some medicines and enguents other which have the properties which I have already written about in the book of the enguents.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is straight in which no canula of the clister is received, then you should amplify that oil little by little, and stop in its covered envelopment with Egyptian enguent or Basilicon enguent when it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And seemingly if the orifice is amplified, you should add the lips of the sewn enguent and subtract the quantity in which it comes between the clister's end.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of the del is elevated at the parts of the skin, you should dry that in the basal place where it comes out of it, as when the brace is cut in the preondeza of sinus the flesh will be in the engendred.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you cannot dry the sinus within the envelope of the os pus bas according to what you want, then you should perforate that member in its preparation for the which comes out of it according to what is to your taste and not being retained by any cause of the brace.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	When you have prepared solid remedies that are placed over the appropriate nerve to extend them above the clothing,
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	When the cloth is as large as the communication of all sinus; and then insert an instrument in the right side of the orifice of the sinus a small tube; and extend over other parts of the limbs according to the quantity of the tube, and pause it over there for a long time at the position of the orifice of the sinus so that the pressure of the bracelet does not leave the limb large until it is cured.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	As many as there are over the orifice of the sinus, which remains tense all day because it is adjusted to the bracelet.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And for what reason do you know if that which comes from the bracelet is little or much, or not digested or digested?
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And do you also consider the location of that sinus, whether in it there is pain for the patient or not, and if it is in the inflammation?
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in that manner, and you see the matter that is applied over the orifice of the sinus has adhered, or if it is appropriated, how you hold the dressing or change it on the third day, and when you remove the plaster, how you change the cloth for another and renew the application.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If the sinus has a small space under it and does not slip away from it, then do not despair of its adherence, for the physician will be able to appropriate it, for those who have generations of carn in these plagues, and for those who have the opposite of this.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus has been blocked for several days and is causing indigestion, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then you should adjust the medication in exsiccacio, and if the medications are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they become dry like finalicon when they are adjusted in excess of addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the more you suffer from the one being treated, it is because you take of finalicon and dissolve in olive oil, and it is over the wound that you have antic engual in its substance, and you comfort that one with it, and use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to have an effect in that one, when there is no blockage, and if finalicon is not found, take of the honey and when you enter that which is engrossed, use that; or if you take marri and aloe and grind them all and sprinkle them over the honey that enters when it is engrossed, and sprinkle them over drap and strengthen that one.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	When some women are administered to by an astrologer who is skilled in the art of lily of the valley (and lilies of the valley) and fennel and centaury, and uses those simple or adjusted ones, twists them and crumbles them and sprinkles powder over the meal that I have recommended; and they use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, you know that the corruption is in the bone of the preon, and there is an investigation in the bones or in other hard bones or ligaments; then you should treat it with a curacio fistular, as it is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	A curacio of panarici and worn-down nails and addition of digit incision and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is applied to the nail that does not leave the upper layer of the skin or foot, and it is less used in other parts, and when it is prolonged and its cure is neglected, or it is applied with apostema caut, or it becomes corrupted, and it enters between the corroded roots of the nail, and it becomes very corrupted, and it pervades the entire nail that has the odor of the fetent, and its end is made, and its color becomes black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	When you have that cold humor that they told you about in the division and it does not relieve your pain, then you should cover that you need to take all the surplus that is rising from the unguent and apply a cautery to the affected area, as cauterization is often used for this purpose.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bones are hard and the unguent is healthy, and the addicts of the unguent want to understand the carnuts at the points of the dint, and then push and lead that, you should cover that subtle part with your hand, and press that on the angle of the unguent that punched the carnut, and pull it in and insert it into the carnut for ease, and place your hand over it so that the painful carnuts do not reappear; and cure that am enguentz so that it is healthy.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If corruption has already taken hold in the bones, then cover that you need to take the bones and the extraguants, because no time is healed when it is in the corrupted bones.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the corrosion and corruption come into the dit, then cover that you need to take it in one of the noses according to what is recommended for its rememoration, and cure that within it so that it is healthy.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If pain is felt in the thigh at the end of percussion or striking, and the pain is very severe, then you should immediately cut off the thigh, and dry it with wet salt on a transverse slice through its entire length, and keep it so that the slice does not enter into the flesh that is now exposed by the thigh, as you will later inflict severe pain on the thigh for the cause of excessive flesh in that place; and also cure that place with what yields pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	If it is tightly fitted, which is common in many men, very much so in the bones, or very much so in the thigh,
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And if the skin of the joint is born in the body, or is the birth of the joint in the skin of the nails of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	If that which is born in the skin of the finger is not bad, and this which is born in the joints is very bad.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those which are born from flesh, the slice is lighter, and it is that you must cut off its own skin with wet salt.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	When the patient was born in the region of the joint, the treatment is difficult; therefore, keep the patient away from the abscess of the joint.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When there is pain in the shoulder, cover it with your hand and press gently with a suitable tool to alleviate the pain. Then care for that area until it becomes healthy again.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	If the joint becomes more stable due to injury or for reasons such as plague or fire combustion, or illusion, then cover that stability with your hand and press gently with a suitable tool to alleviate the pain. Then care for that area until it becomes healthy again.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And pause between the enfused limbs in red oil so that they do not become too stable and separate them, or pause between them with a thin layer of fluid underneath so that it becomes consolidated afterwards.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if it seems that there is stability in the joints of the hand, then dry that stability according to what has been prepared and is suitable for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the inscription of veins, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose and they are full of large, superfluous melancholic veins that flow through the limbs of the body, and more so in the joints, and especially in the joints of itinerants and laborers and those who wear heavy clothing.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	When you have to administer a purge of the heart for black blood with some strong expelling substances, and draw blood from the basilar vein of the patient.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The second part of the cure for them is to cut and burn that black sin, and the other hand is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The cutting of the sin is done according to this hand: first, it begins with the gallbladder duct, which is entered when the black sin is resolved, and is feculent from the duct, and then the duct of the liver is stretched at the point of departure of the wound in the thigh, and a bowel is placed on either side of the denuded part of the wound up to the end of the gallbladder, and the vein is dried in one place or two or three, and the black sin is removed from the liver through the second opening, and it is placed in the juice, when the sin is as much as you wish and as many times as you want, and it tolerates the virtue of the liver.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And apply that, and command him to abstain from black bile-producing foods.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	When the veins are swollen and it is noticed in the thigh, it is customary to perform varicose vein surgery.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	You should raise the thigh, if it is swollen with blood, and put the leg in a bag and massage the knee of the tail to prevent it from being pulled inwards and the veins from becoming enlarged; or if it has been exercised with strenuous exercise, enter that member when it is swollen.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And cut the codon on the right side of the vein at a distance or at the end, or at the base of the vein you need to remove the part.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And open the codon with an incision and cut the vein through its entire length until it appears in the sensation, and you must see that it sometimes turns black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you remove and cut the codon, you sometimes see that white thread is left.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And place your hand further up the thigh when it is raised and swollen, and hold on to that member with one hand.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	When another cut is made in the same way on that section for three days, and the bandage is removed from the area inside where the vein appears, it will be appropriate.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then lift that and insert your thumb into the second section, and extract it and lift it inside where it is hard for the second section, and extract it from the section that is over it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	Then insert it inside where you extracted the pus from that was under the skin or from all the sections, and then insert your finger inside.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If it does not obey and follow your orders to extract and lift, then insert a needle of firm, double-pointed metal into that section, extract it, or insert the rod of the thong and turn your hand over to all parts where it is squeezed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to insert it; if it is broken, it will be difficult to lift that hand and it will come over the thigh for that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that is completely out, place your hand over the location of the wet wool that was immersed in vinegar and rose oil and not in rose oil, and cure it inside where it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the wound is obstructed by a certain twist in which it is involved, and there is no straight path after that, then you should cover that part of the twist and the locations of involvement with your hand, and suspend it above where it rises.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And keep your section safe that you have not pierced the vein and that it does not cause any harm to that; and use your caution in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incision made by the wound is:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of a tornus:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not the wound that is affected as the points or by sharp extremity because it does not pierce the vein; and it is of great flexibility, which if it were subtle, would pierce the vein with its subtlety; there are in it too much grossness as has been said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the thigh vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the lower parts of the thighs, which are low and flat like the Ategian land in Arabia and in the low and dry lands of India with little fertility and without grass or herb.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	When the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate other parts of the body, it is called gout by doctors.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The treatment of the wound is putrid matter that I see coming from the chest as venom from serpents, snakes, and asps, and other things being born between the chest and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The susceptibility of the wound's occurrence is from this vein that happens in the flesh inflamed; and the place is pustulated; and it starts the vein there, which seems to be like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	When the wound reaches its end, you must cover it with a piece of cloth from a dragon's egg, which is the foot of a dragon. Enter into it, and stop on that and lower the suspended piece of cloth from the flesh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	So many watches do you make of the wound to any cause in the deformed parts, cover it with cloth and lower that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is prolonged, you must cut a part of the wound and wrap it around; and if you do not cut that which is outside, then if you cut that which is inside and enter into the flesh, it will cause scarring and purpura in the place and ulceration bad.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	When the affected area is treated with care and is slowly extracted bit by bit, it is important that it is not pushed back into the body cavity and does not cause any further problems in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	This vein is found in many men who have a length of twenty palms, and I have already encountered one that is twenty-two palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is not timed correctly, insert the ray into the abdomen and perforate that long abdominal wall from the foot to the torso, entering when all of this water is evacuated from the matter, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and care for it as part of the cure for appendicitis.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein sometimes has ramps, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and goes to that horrible orifice, and is located in several horrible orifices.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And care for it as they have said in the division and with what has been said.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is caused in any land by the bovine disease if it has many veins that run through the shoulders and are few in the belly, and spread throughout the body and decay, and is shown to the feeling of the member in the member throughout which the spine is disrupted and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of the child is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, and tapeworms, which are found in the intestines.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the malice of the patient, for when he enters the body and rises to the head, and passes into the brain, many worms enter him and destroy the brain, and then many convulsions occur.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	When you want to heal that and extract it, you should not if you do not use the incision and exposure of the body and appendage to the patient's sensation, and then cover that which is over it and that which is further away from it with a cloth, and wet it over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is inflamed in the flesh and does not bleed, then you should pause cauterization with a pointed cautery on the spot where it hurts, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the flesh which corrupts the place as they have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If that should have passed to the head of the wrist, you should tightly bind the overcoat on the strong stricture, and wet it over it, and extract that; and cover that this arm uses for the disfigurement of the heart by the use of medicines evacuating putrid humors, and keep away from generations producing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	In the sectioning of the patient's illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This malignancy is unknown in our land, and it hurts the quality that appears in other members, and it is moved from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	When you have already seen that which I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to attend a woman with a swollen arm in a village, and I found that her arm had a small inflammation in the vein of the forearm, and after an hour, I saw that the inflammation was going away as if silver were being poured into this, although I did not believe that it was, as if silver were being poured into this.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain in that place subsided and remained in the muscle, and after about an hour it stopped.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then the pain spread to the other arm that was affected by the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	I recommend that you rotate the affected arm as much as possible; and it is amazing to see the change in the arm and the speed of the member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	When you have already seen that in the best hands this is not done, but you have seen how those who do it cause great pain to be rotated from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have not seen that in the hands as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	When I realized that it was not gout, but rather a different condition, as the female was quite young, with many corsets and visible veins, and at that time there was a sensation of cold permutations.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	When it is necessary that this retro-curacy does not appear in those who are delicate and have humors that are clouded by veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you wish to perform the curacy of the patient and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at the husk as they have said, but tighten over that and then leave the leg and seal over that within which is that ventosity carved, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not see the wound in the fleshy parts, then perform your cure on that excuse of the heart and excrete that which expels ventosity and carminatives of those pills made from saffron and serapin and semblances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of sage.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sage is diverse according to the species and locations of the heart in which it is plucked, for that diversity is that of those which have large points, and small, concave, and narrow ones; and of those which have three angles, and of those which have tongues; and of those which have stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	1. When the second members or limbs are affected, two main hands are used: those of the head, chest, and lungs, as well as the arms, legs, and intestines, and the bladder; and when one of these limbs or parts seems to be in danger of death, which causes you to advise against it, cover that part with your hand, avoiding extraction from that part where death seems to be in that member in the larger dispositions, and when you do not see those bad signs, and the member is not affected by the depth of the limb, then extract that and treat the abscess.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	2. When the symptoms of the servant are seen in the member, and the bones pass over the skull, and the cyphal which is above the brain, which happens due to the vehement soda, vertigo, dizziness, and loss of consciousness in the limbs, inflammation and spasm of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and much of the word is separated and destroyed by the tooth, and the location of the wet humidity white-like polls is seen, and the semblance of the sign of flesh appears at the sight.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	If you find this situation difficult for you, then avoid the cure and the extraction of the semen, as it may cause harm.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Mays the symptoms of the semen when it is in the body, as if it were close to the left thigh, and no harm is caused; and the movement of the semen resembles the movement of the hand, and the color of the pus is black and thin, and the coldness of the extremities disappears, and the wound heals; and therefore you know that the death has taken its course.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the semen has caused the lung to swell with sanious pus and the vessels that are prop of the collar have been displaced, and the color of the thigh has changed, and great spirit is exhaled, and there is a desire for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the semen is in the sac that is in the chest, and the pain occurs in the small costas, and a great sharp pain is felt in the back and in the breathing, and not all the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the saffron is found in the stomach, then it is likely that the patient has some undigested food causing diarrhea.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the woman's abdomen is filled with something, and it remains there, and any part of the plague, cloth, or intestine that is disrupted, and there is no hope for the removal of the abdomen.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the woman's abdomen catches in the bladder, and it is discharged with urine, and the cause of the defects in the parts of the bladder is unknown, and there is much pain in the thighs, you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other members are similar to the face, neck, and shoulders, and the spine and vertebrae, and the collarbone and ribs, and the scapula and humerus, and the bones of the limbs, which are saved according to the larger dispositions when the abdomen does not obstruct the vein or artery and is not gangrenous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend this to you that you have seen of the nature of these abdomens, so that you know about their cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is, that in a man who has an abdomen in the lacrimal of the eye of the head, and you extract it from another part, and then the gray of the hair grows back, and it heals, and does not accumulate in the socket of the nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	When I extricated another woman from a Jew, who had her in the grayness of his sleeve, and his hand was already out, and the woman was hidden and not found by that alone, but rather by a small extremity at which she adhered to the man's sleeve, and it was a great sageta of the sharp sagetas of the Turks, with a leon in which there were no earrings.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Senate was the Jewish, and it did not happen in the grayness of the man's sleeve by accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	I extracted another woman from a man of the Crestia, who was trapped in the gallbladder, and it was an Arab sageta, and that was the one with the earrings; and then I inserted it over the guidegi, and it was already submerged in the gallbladder of the man; and then I subtly took it out, and extracted it, and cured the Crestia.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	I extracted another woman from a man of the stomach, who was trapped in the belly, and thought that he would die for that; and then, because I had been there for 30 days and had not moved over it for any reason, I inserted it over the sageta and operated on that, and it was cured, and it did not happen an accidental malady.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	When a man is found to have a sore on his thigh, and the wound is closed and hardened over it, and there is about an inch of fever, and the sore is in the middle of the thigh, it is called a gangrene.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	When a woman is found to have an abscess on her belly, and the pus is firm and does not change in its position, and the woman does not bleed in any of her natural functions, it is called an abdominal abscess.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	When a man is found to have an abscess on his face, and the pus is firm and does not change in its position, and the abscess does not cause pain here, and it does not resemble any of these, it is called a facial abscess.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	When the abscess was removed from the man of the first prince of the king who had it on the middle of his nose and had already discharged a small amount of pus, and the entire abscess was hidden, it is called a nasal abscess.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called to the care of the patient for the drainage of the abscess within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	When the plague of the serpent has been exhausted; and then you inquired about that which was tempting, and did not feel it; but you felt it later at the tip of your finger, and then you wondered if that prick was from the end of the serpent.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Then I examined the place where the virtue is attractive and digestive, assuming that this place is what appears to me as the location of the serpent, because it has passed over that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no accident happened in the place that you considered to be the location of the serpent; and you continued to press on it for days without any accident; and the plague became stable, and the thigh of the extremity of the serpent was affected by space for several days until I sensed the serpent in my nose and reconnected this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then you placed your hand on the acute, corrosive medicine for several days until it was burned; and you applied that to the tempting one and exhausted it, and you exhausted the end of the serpent's subtle part, which adhered to the nail.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	When you have adjusted the patient's position in the palsy due to that acute medicine, which I visibly saw was the end of the toe, and it passed my time as this was within the time frame of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	I supposed that the palsy was amplified, and I could enter the forceps into it, and maintain it there, and not decrease its size, as you did not cease to subtly and inventively adjust it using your hands over those of the engineers, when I began to use the forceps descentment points on that day, according to what was in the middle of the caput; and I restored that palsy.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and you restored it and the palsy was consolidated, and it became healthy for the entire thigh, and did not return to that in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extracting some toes according to this rule and its significance, which I have not mentioned, that four parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in my narrative or not understood by me.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The first source sentence translates to: "The skilled physician knows about many things; and it is necessary that what is present be compared to what is absent; and the novelty of the operation and the novel instrument required for the descent of the strange causes of the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When that which is in the place where it is inserted or comes out, or is caused by flesh, and is stung and pulled out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the time when it catches fire, then you should lay it for several days inside the skin of the foot, and let it be attracted by the skin and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it remains in the bone and does not obey your time of insertion, then you should lay it for several days and repeat that which attracts it and causes it to move on each day, and it will be pulled out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey the time of insertion for several days, then you should lay it for you to perforate in the circuit of the sedative in that bone of total part where it is subtlely attracted by the sedative, and extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the sedative is stuck in the skull and has already processed in one of the cavities of the brain, and appears in the thighs of those accidents which you tell me, then you should not extract the sedative and lay it inside that it may be equal to several days; but if the sedative reaches the Cipherac, the death is not for prolonged life.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the saddle is not fixed only in the body of the bone but also does not pass through the fetlock, and the horse's leg remains stiff for several days, and no such accidents occur due to this, then you need to engage the saddle and the horse.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If the saddle does not fit and does not obey your extraction, then you need to administer treatments in the circuit of the saddle as advised, and properly care for the area that has been made clean.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the saddle is already resisting in the location of the knee, and is resisting the feeling, then you need to inquire about that threat, and if you feel it, then shoot that threat with the sturments that are convenient for the attachment of the horse.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constraint of the plague and its length, and there are no nerves or veins here, then you need to press on the plague until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the saddle.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held by the horse's horns that are held, then you need to cut the flesh in which it is fixed from all parts of the whole engagement; and engage over this, if you cannot escape the flesh in the fracture of the horns and in twisting of those that obey.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you are performing the extraction of the uterus in any location where it is, use your own twist of the forceps and forceps to all parts that come within reach of that obese one; and subtly use the subtlety that the uterus is not torn and is faithfully attached to your difficult attraction of it and of that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot find the remedy for that in your time, then take it for several days until the parts that are in the circuit of the body are moistened, and then apply it again where you want to relieve it.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you are opposed to taking this medicine, you should administer the one that has been prescribed in the capital city.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue from incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and apply any medicine you can possibly find to prevent the escape of the wound; and may it be easy, calm, and slow, and firm and sure as you have commanded.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then you should make the wound as small as possible, so that this thigh is second in size to the figure that has been prescribed, and the pain of the wound should be less.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not possible for you, you should administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	The wounds that are caused by contraction in the opposite direction of another part, or that have already been treated in other parts of the same part, or cause gillbositat of the wound due to the feeling of the part pushed aside from the tendon, then you should cut over that; and it should be the seccio according to the quantity in which they take hold with the forceps; and then atra a that part, so that it is slightly contracted in the esssiment.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If the joint is held in the bone, then you should twist the arm in the opposite direction when the finger presses on the bone, and widen it as much as possible, and pull it out.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Otherwise, keep holding that for several days, and repeat it as needed.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the joint of the finger is in that position, then push it with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the joint of the finger is stuck and needs to be treated with pressure, then insert your hand into it, if it's tight, stretch it so that the cavity of the finger fits inside the concave part of the thumb and push it with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the thumb is concave, then push it with your hand as hard as possible, until the thumb is held in place by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the finger is intoxicated, then cover the entire flesh in which it is located, as much as possible, and take care of that as needed, and if necessary, treat it with something appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the finger is caught in the chest, or in the stomach, or in the abdomen, or in the side, and it is necessary to touch that part for treatment, and it is possible to cover it with something, then cover it with something and keep track of the vein or nerve, and pull it out, and apply it, and if necessary, clean it when it is healed, and treat it.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The first line can be translated as: "The shape of forceps that are used when the teeth are pulled out:". This line seems to be discussing dental forceps,
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The second line can be translated as: "And their ends are like that of a saw, which is sharp when we hold it on the tooth so that we do not hurt it." This line seems to be describing the shape and use of dental forceps. The ends of the forceps are compared to a saw blade, which is sharp and can cut or grasp the tooth without causing pain.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	The third line can be translated as: "And they are made of special movements, large and small and medium-sized, according to the size of the tooth and the width of the gum, and the width of the gap, and the constriction of the tooth." This line seems to be describing the design and function of dental forceps. The movements of the forceps are specialized to fit the size of the tooth, the width of the gum, and the width of the gap between the gum and the tooth. The constriction of the tooth is also considered in the design of the forceps.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The fourth line can be translated as: "The shape of the push-out cone of this end is like a tooth that presses against the gum so that the root of the tooth is inserted into it, and the force of the clamp." This line seems to be describing the design of the dental forceps. The push-out cone is shaped like a tooth, with a pointed end that presses against the gum to insert the root of the tooth. The force of the clamp is also considered in the design of the forceps.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The first line seems to be discussing the formation of pressure at the end of something. A possible translation could be: "The formation of pressure at the tip
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	The second line seems to be discussing how to alleviate pain at the tip of something. A possible translation could be: "And if it is necessary to relieve pain at the tip of the intestine, then push it into the concave pouch.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is the one that gives the curvature of the wild elk's leg; the second is the sciatic vein, the location of which is the wild elk's leg; the third is the venous sinus, the location of which is the domestic elk's leg; and in the leg there are other similar veins like those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The juice of the veins that are closest to the ears is used for making catalytic ancient and migraines, coughs, and ulcers of the old head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of squeezing those is second to what you recommend to me: it should be sharp at the base of the head, and sharp at the base of the head in the occipital region in the location of the good friction; apply pressure to the head with a tongue inserted between the teeth where the eyes and the holes of the same are located in two points of the head; and that is what you said, and if you feel the tips of those in the said way, here it is.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	You should take the sharp lancet, and that is the one that is incident, and then you should introduce that point into the vein through that hole that goes to the bone that meets the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand and hold the vein and codon in parts, and insert the vein into the incision made earlier.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And is the length of the incision two thirds or an eighth of that; and then do the scar as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten the powder and remove it inside where it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And then earlier in the beginning of the freeing of the wound, make an incision and cauterize those and theirs.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the arteries are venas that are the templars' jewels, the advantage of the fleubotomy is in the old migration and it is evil and insatiable and for the corps of sharp superfluous effusions in the sides.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of fleubotomizing those is second to what you recommend to me: strengthen the thigh the way you want, enter the space where the arteries appear at the feeling per appearance and manifestly demonstrate the hands of theirs' end the said; and then do as you please.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	When you have raised the patient's collar over the vein and inserted the forceps into the desired position, and raised the vein above it; and insert it as you have done in the other veins; and make it run along the line of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then, remove the forceps from the patient's thighs and place the thumb on the vein for an hour, and place your thumb on that point and stretch it as much as possible, and release it from that point when it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the preceding reminder of them and those that were inserted, and the attraction at the beginning of the free end.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the advantage of fleebotomy on the veins of the face is that it is similar to the fleebotomy of the cephalic vein in old wounds of the face, and emigration, and hardness, and ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the fleebotomy is according to what you recommend to me; this is because the thigh stretches the inner part of the leg where the vein appears; and hold the instrument that is called the forceps of which this is the form of it:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point that is on the top of the fossa over the vein and percussions over it with the thumb or another part of the hand, and leave the sand to run according to the quantity you want; and remove the incision of the thigh and tighten the part that is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	If some incisions are made by sharp instruments, it is not necessary that the flebotomy be at the end of the vein as with the others, but rather it should be at the middle, and the flebotomy should be made on the second transverse section, where the four bones are pushed in and the hand can easily tear through the flebotomy when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The advantages of the two veins that are the lacrimal veins of two hairs for the scabs on the hairs and the secretions in the hairs, and for the wounds of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the flebotomy is that the thigh stretches the collar, and the flebotomy is made on those, and you should stay on the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	If the incision is made along the transverse axis for a certain length, and in that location there is no flesh; and if the incision is made very carefully, then the end of it will be quite sharp.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And as much as it is necessary to run the lancet, and stop over those knots, and stretch them with a new one, and then untie them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	The incisions of the veins in the nose are often associated with acute fever and sudden vomiting, and with the diseases of the face and eyes and rigidity that occur in the face, and especially when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the incision of the thigh is that it stretches the collar and holds the nape with the right hand, and takes the incision very fine long and places it in the middle of the vertex of the nose according to rectitude, where the vein does not appear at the sensation here, and where the sanc begins to flow so much.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover that you recently made your patient's thighs small incisions and ran the lancet according to your need; and then tie it with a new one, where it is restored gently.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the advantage of vaginal surgery for the female guide to confinement, the beginning of leprosy and the onset of malnutrition and impetigo and corrosive ulcers as hypotyphos.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the fleebotomy in those cases is that the thigh stretches away from each part in the foot; and the artisans should be on the head of the thigh, and the thigh should be placed on a bed.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	The fleebotomy should be long enough to reach the end of the vein, and it should be extracted in small pieces or as needed that it may be necessary; and it should resemble another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And remove the ligament and stretch the other veins by tightening them so that the thigh does not become twisted, and let it enter the matter where the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The advantage of the fleebotomy of the veins is that it reduces small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers in the nose and in the circuit of the thigh.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the fleebotomy in those cases is that it relieves the thigh from twisting, and tightens the thigh of the patient with a needle, and turns the lips of the patient and looks at the other veins of which one is on the left side of the lip and the other on the right; and the demonstration of each is by the nose of each of those small black veins; and then inserts each in the incision made in the incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you doubt any further, and do not know which one it is among them, then understand the appearance of the majority of them, and the manifestation of the pus from them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And see the appearance of the veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to insert the veins that are in the lip further.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	It is customary to insert the veins that are in the tongue further, and at the prefrontal area of the head, at the malformation of the uvula, and at the malformations of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of the fleubotomy is that it follows the malformation between the patient's thighs, raises the tongue, and watches further the tongue, from one vein lump to another vein lump, and the color of each is turning black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And continue to fleubotomize each one; and keep watching that you do not end the tongue before the fleubotomy of those, for those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the veins in your groin have been previously incised in the area where it is customary for all men to have them, and the incision of their veins is made with two forceps, or place an oil-soaked cloth on the subtlety declining; or use a vascular forceps, and call it a clamp, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This clamp is that which is convenient for incision and those special loops and subtle ones according to the width of the veins and according to the stricture of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of fleubotomy mirror:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The width of the vein is such that it should open the concave full vessels appearing as large ones and to those that contain thin tortuous ones.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of fleubotomy olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this fleabootomy is of less width and with a subtle extremity, and it is convenient for the fleabootomy of subtle veins that contain thin subtle citrus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	More the benefit of the fleabootomy of the basilica vein which is one of three veins: four extraxt the sanc of the maladies that are from the left side of the guolayro and the col, and from that which is seized by the pietz and the ventre.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It is recommended to the surgeon when performing the incision, that he keeps it open and be careful not to injure any nearby structures, if he accidentally cuts an artery, it will cause bleeding of the sanguine fluid, so that he does not accidentally cut too deeply into the flesh, and be cautious not to cut through the tendon.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear clearly, you should cover that and move to another place, or surround that with some ram; or if you cut in the end of the arm where it is visible, and cover that with flesh as they have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to cut the incision of the metheglin, you should cover the stricture of the arm that touches the location inside where the location of the fingers is, and cover it with your hand; and cut the arm and cut the vein in a concave way that is opposite to the flesh as they have said; and make sure to cover the percussion for the space of the artery location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see that the joint is stiff, notice that the swelling is in the location you have observed, and then press on that swelling.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If the sweat flows during the circumcision like silver of a child, and the sweat is subtle, you know that it is from the sweat of the artery; and you cut and place your hand on that part over long space; and if the sweat is abscised, four watches pass before it is abscised, then you tighten the arm and let go of that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	You should guard the wound of the foot, and place a bandage over it, not removing it for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the sore does not heal, and sometimes you are not present to give medicine for it, you should pierce the artery if you see it; cut at the extremity of the foot, and the wound will be released; or take a sharp stick, and push it in, and hold it there over the location of the vein that is strictly compressed by the limb and the pulley on another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the wound is healed, that is good; and if not, you should cure that of which the dust of the wound flows from the sore.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The opening of the sore of the foot is difficult in positions that are not suitable for the small location of the plague and the possibility of the limb of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	More often than not, fleebotomy is the best way to extract the sore from the subcutaneous location of the head and to the extremity of the chest; therefore, it is composed of ram from the basilica and ram from the cephalica, as they have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	When the anesthesia is applied to the area that is feared in the anesthesia of the patient, four things are found there; and then if it adjusts in the puncture of the anesthesia and paralyzes the nerve, it will cause the patient's stupor, and it is difficult to cure the patient, and for most people it is not cured, and this nerve that is seen moves with the feeling; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not shown, you cover that you are opening the anesthesia as the one you open the anesthesia with the section of the knife, and avoid the nerve in your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you must cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of cranial veinotomy is that it relieves head pain and alleviates the symptoms of cerebral hemorrhages.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And cover this exactly, if you want the veinotome to cut the veins or just the veins, and that is the salvation of all the veins, and not the artery or the nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is important that you perform the craniotomy so that you do not cut the scalp of the lizard just for it, and surround the location with some padding, and do not notice if it does not become blurred after the first percussion on the veinotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is more important that you do not postpone the craniotomy in cases where it has not been performed on the first percussion, and you will not notice the aphasm in the future.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the craniotomy and the accidents that occurred in the process, for which you should think about their correction in the future.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first source sentence translates to:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When there is pain in the joint, it is called gout by doctors. On the third day, or on the first morning after three hours have passed, the surgery will be performed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The less the surgery is administered, the more it is convenient and necessary at that time, or not at all, or on another day, in total time and in every hour.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is not possible to perform a fleubotomy if there are forty years old and the woman has not been operated on until the fourth month after seven, and the elderly are not operated on those who have passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if a man wishes to be operated on by any surgeon, it is necessary that the intestines be tied before the operation, if they have been fixed with a clamp, because the veins do not cause damage to the joints of the intestines, which are pure and do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And the intestines are not operated on by the naive and sacred flesh of the pus, nor by evacuation of mucus or diarrhea, nor ebriety within which it is useful to be within this time of theirs, nor intoxication, and less that fleubotomy is feared by colic pain and vomiting, and cost of stomach, and multiplication of coitus and work and exercise of sleep or watchfulness and all causes that dissolve the virtue, or is corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And if you consider in subtlety of the humors that cause this, then the sinew is large, with thin and short tendons, and the medicines are such as can be applied to this part.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if you do not prevent it from being wet, or exercise it with some exercise to make the sinew subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And stop the foot operation on the patient's chest, it is now the time for third relief, as they have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And tell him that this chest should be guarded on that day of all animal accidents, as it is with anxiety, anger, fear, and all corporal accidents, as it is with labor and excessive pain and appearance of like things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his own handwriting, the causes are present in the use of the quality that is customary for men, and it is aromatic and odorous and has balsams and similar things according to the second quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the foot operator on a cushion that is placed or that it has been placed, and on the one who has undergone the operation.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	When extracting the arm, and cut it at that point with the surgeon's knife or three times; and then tightly tie the wound with a thread and wrap that around the knife.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	If the stricture is temporary, that is, the stricture that does not cause constipation, or if it is superfluous, you are forbidden to take laxatives; or if it is mollificatory, and you are forbidden to take too much food.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if the stricture is applied, it is said that the one who gives birth must cut the muscles of the abdomen between them so that the veins are inflamed and are declared in the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the knife is made of the patient's own bone; and then stops the patient's hand on that vein, that place where the incision is to be made, so that the vein comes out a little, and the percussion is placed on the vein that is closest to the flesh, and that which is full of wind and when you stop the incision over it, the incision must be closed by the incision, and the incision does not tighten the vein, and if it does, it is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, in order for this knife to be stopped and to remain in all of these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	When you have paused the incision, if the vein is pulsating in a vein, leave it alone; otherwise, you will have to make another incision further on, or over the area where the intestine is twisted, if that part is not swollen.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is swollen, or the thigh is lax, you should lay the patient for a day or two, and do not strain the limbs, for fear of causing an apostematous caudate, nor should you put on wet clothes.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And if necessary, you will have to repeat the incision if the blood is coagulated.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the healing is small and slow, and you fear that it will not heal the desired amount, you should repeat the incision in that direction, making sure to adjust the wound a little each time, and if the area is swollen, you must make fewer cuts.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If the area has already become swollen, do not repeat the incision over it, as there is no cause for you to do so; and pause over that certain part of the thong, where the wound is, in order to alleviate the pain of the wound.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	When it is better in this place than oil and the others.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	When it appears that the incision is bleeding excessively in total abdominal surgery, which cuts the veins and causes obstruction of the coronary artery, and thrombosis occurs at the same time, and when the sanc (heart) becomes subtle and begins to revolve when it gets larger, it is necessary to stop the incision.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If in the location of the laparotomy a great aposteme is generated, four observed motions occur, and most importantly for that which has not been bled but that vein, or in the engorgement of the small vein, and you cut, and place your hand over the location, soaked with water infused with air and salt, a few scalpels, and hold it for an hour, that is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that with this to the end of the sinus of that vein or of another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If Roman is present in the location for several days with any blackness or greenish color, it is not known; and if you want, place your hand over that cause of dissolution and mirrort, or any cause of sweat or wool or semblant of the like.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	 Four observed motions occur in postoperative laparotomies and eminences of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	 Then place your hand over that, and if you cut, you must place your compression on that, and the eminence of that is evil and bad; and then keep in mind that you have placed your hand over that any cause of water that has been said, for much to flow from the sinus arteria.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the area is dressed with an astringent, because it must be endured, and care should be taken for that, it is appropriate to apply this to the other part of the wound after it has healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover that which is taken from the sanctuary to all men according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color they come out, and then the sanctuary appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the sanctuary is black, then you must put it in when it is rough, and apparently if you see it large, put it in when it is subtle; and if it is sharp, when its sharpness is left, leave it.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And cover that which is large and strong and needs extraction of the sanctuary through a vein, where the flebotomy of the vein is expanded and the flebotomies are left.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is thin, make the opposite of that, and cover that in troops of veins, and that the truss be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best way to administer flebotomy of the vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This maneuver of lithotomy is saved from the flow of sand and the injury of nerves, and it is praised and considered safe for performing lithotomy at different latitudes and longitudes.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	When gout (or "sincopi") is customary, you must perform fleubotomy, and cure the patient with a small dose of an infusion made from one hundred grains or simple oxide; extract the urine from the bladder in three or four draughts.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If there is fever of the collection, you must take an infusion of urine made from one hundred grains or a simple oxide infusion made from aromatic essences such as ginger, cinnamon, and spices like cloves, nutmeg, and simmonds, or an aromatized essential oil.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If gout (or "sincopi") occurs, you must perform fleubotomy due to the severity of the urinary disorder, and take an infusion of animal juice with aromatic essences such as ginger, cinnamon, and spices like cloves, nutmeg, and simmonds, or an aromatized essential oil. Use aromatics wisely, and keep the side effects in mind.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes that have been mentioned in the division on the capital of gout for elimination.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	When the pain in the arm becomes severe and second-hand sight is lost, it is considered that the arteriosclerosis has occurred in the affected area, and the veins are distended, which evacuate the blood drop by drop, so it is followed by the amount of blood in the following days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	When the pain in the arm becomes severe and second-hand sight is lost, and the veins are distended, the heart also becomes strong, and the patient must suffer for about seven hours or nine days of the first herniabtomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	When the pain in the heart becomes severe and opposite to the direction of the vessel, it is considered that it has occurred on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When the pain in the heart becomes severe and opposite to the direction of the vessel, it is considered that it has occurred on the second or third day. If the heart is already scalded and sharp, and if the fever occurs in one vein and a large amount of blood is evacuated, then it is amplified within the sincopi; and you will have preserved all the conditions of herniabtomy; and you must hold the heart of the sanc with your hand, so that it does not die in place of sincopi, four more veins are emptied every time the herniabtomador is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you want to slide the arm and remove the second vessel, as the wound of the vein is closed and the pain of the artery is difficult, then press subtly with that force and bend your hand inward, curving it slightly, as this is too much.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When the knife enters the flesh according to the cut; or it remains with this acuteness of the cut that is coagulated by the force in the vein; or it is placed over the tissue alfarach, or saggenea, and compresses that with a compressor inside where the sanc is outside and out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is gangrenous, then cut that and do not touch it inside where the gangrene is settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to cause you to evacuate the sanc according to the order, and not to excuse, then cut that over that place or in the other arm on another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the thigh's cord" is cut in place of the fuscus or basilica, when it is not hardened or dried out, four are composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the cut of that is that the thigh introduces its hand into the watery tail inside where the focus seduces and that the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	When the tightness is on that side of the joint, and the incision is made according to the short transverse line, not latitudinally nor along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And is the incision wide and is your fleebotomy at that which you fleebotomize over the joint of the knee?
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of the wound is prohibited, then you repeat the knee in the water tail and let the sand run in the water until you can fulfill your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the days of summer, then you would be excused from the repetition of the knee in the water tail, and the time would pause the corse of the sand in the water tail during the summer.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the fleebotomy of this vein is put saved that of all the others, four out of five do not have a pulsating vein, nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the fleebotomy of the sole of the knee is compared to the maladies of the foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the fleebotomy is that you tighten the knee with the leg or with your hand, placed because you have placed it in the water tail, when the vein is inflamed and is shown at the same time; and the incision is made according to that transverse line; and if not cut along that, not everything will be saved.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	When it comes to saving the final part of your thighs, first remove the flesh from the three bones you have stripped bare.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then it is best to insert the needle into the tail bone and let the sin run down there, but if you do not insert it in the tailbone, the sin will coagulate in the distal part of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	When you draw out the sin according to the amount of need, stop over the vein or artery and do not solidify it too much; it seems that you are doing this in all straight lines.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The advantage of the thighotomy on that side is that it is similar to the maladies of the pelvis.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do it in a similar way in the thighotomy as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the thighboneotomy is that it is similar to the maladies of the pelvis, which are found in the part where the other bones are located, such as those in the thigh, and also in the ulcers of the legs and old changes, and they seem to be similar to the maladies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the fleshotomy in this case is that the wound enters the desired location in the vein and then passes over the joint of the foot; it covers the vessel of the ankle with a small cut, and the location of the vein appears at the tip of the foot, and that ramifies into the face of the foot with multiple branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, the fleshotomy should be made large enough to cover the cushion of the leg, and the cut should be made at the level of the calf, which is better and will cause less pain.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you make the fleshotomy on that part of the foot, be careful not to cut any nerves that are located there, and stop your fleshotomy at the point where you want to make the incision, as if you were inserting it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if the fleshotomies are correct.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	However, if it is prohibited to insert the drain, you should repeat the foot of the patient in the vein and let the drain run through that which has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the fleshotomist err on the first vein, you should repeat at the fleshotomies in a smaller place, where the location is safe; and do not fear for the malician, rather be careful of the nerves as they have been said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	When it appears that there is an unnatural growth of the other foot's sole.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	When from the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said, you must leave the tip in the cavity of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the advantage of the surgical treatment for the foot is that it can be done quickly when it is possible to cauterize.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the fleebotomy is that it quickly enters the bag, and tightens and stretches the leg of the wide part within the tube of four teeth under a long, thin needle, which does not appear except for this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, you perform the fleebotomy on that second course which is nearest to you and then along the transverse, and is better; or if you are inclined to do it by incision or cutting, the place of the foot is sore.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the hands of many who are careful; and if you cut that, and it does not appear to the whole, you perform the fleebotomy on some part of the foot, and that which appears in the two of the foot's end with the ear and the ring.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and make the cauterization run according to the amount you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	When it is necessary to relieve the stricture and place a pillow over the location of the incision, in order to apply pressure and thus heal the wound.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of wind and the quality of those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Wind is of corn, or of hair, or of vegetables.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And wind is caused by one of these: the first is a scarification and the extraction of sand, and the second is the wind itself.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this wind that causes the scarification is made by one of these: either it is made by fire or by the fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the winds that are made by scarification and the extraction of sand are fourteen locations of the body, of which one is the location where the other winds are placed, and it is the same part of the head; and the location of the other winds is at the corner of the chin; and winds of the mouth are placed outside of the mouth; and winds of spatulas; and winds of a louse, and two feet; and winds of two candles, and two brushes; and winds of holes; and winds of holes.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	The first source sentence translates to:
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	When labor pains are necessary due to childbirth or continuing, apply this remedy at the beginning of the month at the start of the cycle and throughout the entire time until the end of the month, and in the same location as before and whenever it is needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is in those who are multiplied by the men who multiply when they need to extract from them and disintegrate in the seat of their seriousness and sorrow; and of those who disintegrate and become weak in their face and in the head, and in the neck; and of those who become weak in their face and in the front and darkness and dullness and heaviness in their limbs; and of those who lose their place of childbirth; and of those who multiply their pains; and of those who become multiplied by the taste of savor in their mouth, or whose tongue is postponed and spits out savor; and of those who sleep becomes multiplied, and of those who awaken in sleep with weakness and anxiety and plagues and other causes of their appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when you notice in any cause of these, and indeed if it is in the third or fourth week of the month, then do command that the labor pains be made to occur as soon as two or three hours have passed since the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	When the windpipe of the neck is affected by gravity and falls into the head, and more so when it is found to be an evacuation of all the body, then...
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This windpipe is in the location of a frontal lobotomy.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not necessary to use that which is of complex complexity, or in that which is of catarrh, for it does not give the great remedy.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore, it is not necessary to use those on the eyes, and in the heads of those who are diseased with loose foreskins.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Moreover, if one continues to sit on it, there is the risk of forgetfulness; and therefore, it is necessary that you command the windpipe to pause its movement for a short time in the parts where it has been, in order to avoid the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Less windpipe of alchemy is in the location of a frontal lobotomy of the vein fusca and the basilica: and therefore, it affects asthma, and the constraint of the alveolus and the scissura of the sturment of the alveolus, and the throat, and the replecio.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and French as well. I will try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into English:
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	When the cold humor of the liver causes accidental pain in the head and throat, as well as in the eyes, and preferably in the teeth; and it is located in the region of the gallbladder.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And command the wind to not press with its hand, but rather with a sharp cut, so that the artery does not enter and cause a flow of pus.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The wind places the chin on the alcohol in the mouth, and on the corruption of the gingiva, and on the resemblance to those that are in the mouth of the sick, and it is located in the region of the gallbladder.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the wind that is made on the teeth with spatulas be made of chalk, which is made for the purpose of removing heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the wind that divides the teeth of the fire is good for the fleubotomy of three veins, which are of the gallbladder, black and capillary, those that are at the root of all those veins, and those that are in the carn, and those that are in the other veins, which are thick.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When commanding the surgeon not to perform too much excision, let the location be stripped of flesh, and then he should expose the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	E is a wind that is used to blow on the thighs and buttocks to alleviate the pain of hemorrhoids and suppurating pus.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And command the surgeon to use a great wind, and that it be of earth, so that the place requires a deep cut; and then use subtle winds and perform excision by excision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Many winds are needed to massage the limbs, and they reach the entire body, alleviating old pain in the joints, knees, and vagina; they provoke menstruation, and alleviate bothersomeness and inflammation; and they stay in location for fleshotomy of sternal wounds, and abdominal and pelvic cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	In the end, remove all the limbs and make incisions in the inner parts of the body.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the winds that are applied to the abdomen, the benefit is attributed to the winds applied to the limbs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the wind vessels is that they pause the wind at the beginning of its view and gradually pass by temperate air, and do not prolong the position of the wind vessels, less pause those gently, and return them gently, and that the humors come to the place by accidental encounter.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the location already enlarged and inflamed, and the signs of the disease appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And you should scrape and repeat the gentle dose in small amounts, and consider in the disposition of the chest.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Fourth, that person who has tender flesh of rare parts, cover it with a dressing and do not push, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the wind vessel to enlarge the scarification and pour a little, and make the gentle dressing easy.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If in the disease it grows, you should cover that you scrape several dressings, where in the first one you open the way of subtle passage to the disease and to the aquosity of the patient.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second part of the acquisition of the extraction of the large sinus.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the wound is foul-smelling, then make a scraping of the outer layer to allow it to heal.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And in order to remove small amounts or a little at a time, a scraping is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to remove a large amount of pus, make a deep scraping; and if we find that the pus is large, then make a deeper scraping.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of the scraping refers to the depth of the cut, which is done for no other reason.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If that of which the knife is thick, hard, dark, and the wounds are sharp, then make the cuts as deep as possible, making the openings of the veins larger, more easily resolvable; if it is in summer, use olive oil, olive oil of violat, olive oil of almonds, or olive oil of camomile; and if it is in winter, use olive oil of narcissus, olive oil of liri, olive oil of chamomile, or olive oil of the sanc, and in that manner.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the superfluity is large, remove it, and if the oil is bitter, use olive oil, olive oil from balm, olive oil of aloe, or olive oil of aneth, and it will resemble them.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the ventilator is of large parts of flesh, you cover that it is prohibited to oil, and cover that this loci of vents are prop to the ventozation sian lavatz am ayguaros or am aygua freja de solatrum, or am aygua de coja, or am aygua de bordolaguas, and it will resemble them.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that of which the sand is of wet humidity, wash your vents with oil or water and myrtle and sumac and it will resemble them.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of that of which the superfluities are large, wash your vents with oil or water and myrtle and sumac, which is majorana, or of decoccio of aneth, or of camamilla, and it will resemble them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And cover that the ventilator is kept under the bath; having covered that it is administered properly of the bath for an hour or for two, and it will sleep with the ventilation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	This sentence is asking what it is necessary to do before a bloodletting procedure, which is a medieval medical practice involving the removal of blood from a patient. The translation of this sentence into English would be: "What must be done before a bloodletting procedure
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	This sentence is advising that if the person performing the bloodletting procedure (the venosator or bloodletter) is hot-tempered and prone to inflammation, they should take cold causes such as ice, vinegar, and herbs like mint, lemon balm, and wormwood, and drink them beforehand. The translation of this sentence into English would be: "If the person performing the bloodletting procedure is hot-tempered and prone to inflammation, they should take cold causes such as ice, vinegar, and herbs like mint, lemon balm, and wormwood, and drink them beforehand.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	This sentence is advising that if the person performing the bloodletting procedure pauses their walking, they should take cold causes such as ice, vinegar, and herbs like mint, lemon balm, and wormwood, and drink them beforehand. The translation of this sentence into English would be: "If the person performing the bloodletting procedure pauses their walking, they should take cold causes such as ice,
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	This sentence is advising that if the person performing the bloodletting procedure stops their walking, they should take cold causes such as ice, vinegar, and herbs like mint, lemon balm, and wormwood, and drink them beforehand. The translation of this sentence into English would be: "If the person performing the bloodletting procedure stops their walking, they should take cold causes such as ice, vinegar, and herbs like mint, lemon balm, and wormwood, and drink them beforehand. They should also eat sparingly, avoid spicy foods, and drink plenty of water. The person performing the bloodletting procedure should also avoid excessive exercise and rest.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	When in the day of ventozacio and flebotomy, the blood is greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is said that if some foods, such as Tyrian tiriacum or alpharac, are given in the blood, or if medicines for muscles are taken, they cause muscle weakness, or if the blood is drawn or the vein is punctured during ventozacio or flebotomia, or at any other time, then the main limbs are comforted and the wound is subsided; and it does not matter if the cautery is used.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	There are many vents that are the result of previous scarifications, and on the thighs, toes, and umbilicus, and over the pelvis and wide ankle, where these members have not suffered scarification before.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those only because of the wound of the member, but rather to pause the vents over the breast in the absence of the flow of the sanc from the narc, and to use that way where the ventositis freja is dissolved by the sanc of the member, and to pause over the stomach and umbilicus, so that the rarefied member is scalped and the pain that resolves the ventositis is caused.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	When you have placed your hand over the thighs when they have fallen asleep due to cold or fatigue, it is advisable to do so for a short time in order to stimulate the lameness and eliminate the fatigue from that place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems that when you have placed your hand over the womb and the pessary, there is vibration in those enclosed parts.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These vibrations are administered with great care, and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some vibrations are administered full of water in the womb's maladies.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is because the vibration is full and is pushed out, that the water comes out alone or in the water that is used to make it convenient for the patient.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of vibration administered with fire: it is the amplitude of the orifice of two thumbs, as we have formed them; and the quantity of the preon is the greatest of a palm; and it is in the place that is in the circuit, in the location where it enters one hole, the turn is small according to the quantity that enters one hole.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	When there is pain in the joint, it is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the entire body, and pain occurs in the feet. This is customarily called gout by doctors. If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then use a pointed cautery for this purpose. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if it is the side of the gallbladder that is affected by cold or iron, where a candle is placed on the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And if this ventilation is not as great as that which has been recommended; and the little more of that second that follows the malady and the state of that which uses it,
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	and the ventilations of the infants and exhausted are different from those of the young and large-bodied,
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	and the quality of placing this ventilation over the member is that it extends the fire made of wood gently with a little wax candle, and places it on the side of the transverse gallbladder in the location of the ventilation, so that the fire is lit around the part where it is not burned the body of the malady.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And if it is placed over the patient's thigh, and it is said that it is over the wound that has been made, then when you have your ventouses and do not indicate whether they have been put in and whether they are causing vapor to rise over that wound, then the ventouse should be so dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And properly follow the machine with your own hands, and do what is indicated in that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	The more ventouses that are administered to the patient's thigh of plauressi, and water, in which there is no transverse or wound, and it is only administered with water, and is placed over the member solely.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this ventouse, the more grande it is, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 178.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Blood clots are not administered in any other members except in those members where it is impossible to place ventouses due to their small size, as well as the gum and resemblance of the same; or in a naked member of flesh, as well as the nose and later resemblance.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	When it comes to the quality of using those that if you have found blood in the wounds of clean and unblemished skin,
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And if they are swollen the day before and the wound is full of water, and there is no cause for it in the abdomen of those; and if the intestine has been evacuated at the beginning of the operation and the vents have been closed; and if the member of the thigh is swollen and has turned black; and if they are placed over it,
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are swollen and in case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the wound with the wind, it will heal faster.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Otherwise, wash the wound with clean water and apply it with moisture; and apply a poultice and wrap it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the intestine is prolonged and the cement of the blood vessels, and it remains, then you should put a damp cloth under the water, and place it over that until the residue is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the intestine is multiplied, you should powder vitriol or guards and similar substances on it, until the intestine is abscessed; or they are placed over the location with the nails of fresh beans excoriated, and they are swollen and the intestine adheres to the location, and the abscess is formed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	If necessary, repeat the bloodletting process when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If bloodletting is prohibited from being suspended, then make points on the location that is most recent or insert a needle into the locations entered that are sank; and place them at a distance of about those that feel any pain.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want to close them, sprinkle a little oil or salt and charcoal on those, and then close them as much as possible.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Now begins the treatment of the third part: from the restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very important in the art of medicine; and it is about restoring fractures and accidental displacements in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, know that this chapter is about the follies and vanities of doctors and those who in time will not pay attention to the freedoms of the Ancients nor read even one letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this manuscript of the scientists in our land is private; and you are not obliged to pay for it in any time but only by the long reading of the freedoms of the Ancients and studying about their understanding of those, and then extracting the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And accordingly direct yourself to experiments and studies in the course of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	When I first described in this chapter the entirety of what I know and what has been passed down from my knowledge; I opened it up to you all and relieved myself of its burden; and I opened it further at its end; and I presented it at its end; and I formed it in various forms of sturments that I administer in that manner, as is done with an addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the breaking of bones, from those whose release is necessary before we begin the remembrance of the members of the broken bones and their differences in each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Cover that we speak in the preface of the summary of this chapter; and the chapters for the understanding of those who at the beginning of it were the artificers and on the truth of those; so you and they who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And I say that when an accident occurs in any fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, you should take care to go to the beginning of amputation or aleyar that, or else employ someone who can, unless there is any prohibition, as if it is of great virtue, or it is the one that has happened, or it is due to old age, or it is the time of violent heat, or of violent cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And if the patient's diet consists mainly of herbs and meats of various kinds, and prohibits fatty meats and all foods that fill the veins of the member, then you should be careful to avoid aphthous cavities and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	When you return the intestine to its proper position, it should be placed in the first routine that is common for this patient.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	When the wound begins to heal, it is important that the intestine is not surrounded by indigestible foods of nutritious foods that are hard and heavy in which the intestine is viscous, as those that are made from flour soaked in water, and meat, and bones, and feet of cows, and eggs, and fresh fruits, and vegetables that are large and similar to those, and this regimen is given a coagulation of fracture with lemons and honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You know that bones become soft when they are in men and in the first year of life and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated afterwards in nature due to the desiccation of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	When they are consolidated and continued according to their nature, they become hard and continued over time due to the desiccation of those members, and they continue and are consolidated in the end of flexibility, as the bones of the small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	When nature adjusts and covers over the broken bones of any part, it seems like glue that grows and stretches within that which is glued together, and which is conglutinated and liated, within which the fire of strength and firmness dwells, as if a fire at the beginning, within which no cause prohibits this from being one of its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary to rest the thighs, thighs in which there is gravity and viscosity and heaviness, as they have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A different type of fracture for each member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fractures are different according to the members, and a fracture of the bone in the thigh is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the bone in the chest is different from a fracture of the two; and it seems that all other bones are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you remember the entire type of fracture, explained in the distinctive head of the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A different type of fracture can occur.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fractures in their occurrences are different; for one is an arc fracture, another that happens in the stars; and some are fractures according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the pelvis and sternum and additics come and do not come, as it comes when prepared to write, and a fracture of the plague and disruption in the head, and a fissure small.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	When in any case a certain part of the body is affected, it is necessary to restore it in the second position, recalling its distinct place in its respective locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	The text describes a medical condition known as "motta" or "motional" which is caused by a fract
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The text then explains that the condition is recognized as a bone fracture: it is a twisting of the bone, and the pain is felt in the area where the break occurs, and it is noticed when you touch that part with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	The text concludes that if there is no apparent twisting of the bone and no pain is felt when touching the bone during movement, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	The text suggests that it may be possible that the condition is a twisting or small fissure, but not necessarily a fracture if you do not feel pain when touching the bone with your hand and there is no compression of the entire area; there may be some pause over the location of the medications used at the time that reminds you of the moment that was appropriate for that place; and there may be a stricture subtle.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The text explains that you know that the location where it is curved and not divided into two or another if no accidents occur in its segment, as it is corrected completely from the whole part of its comparison, you cover that you come from your time to rectification of those that happen in postemia caut.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If the accident is an apoplexy, you should lay that part for several days after the apoplexy ceases; and if it does not improve, cut off that subsequent hand that you can lift and hold.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You know that the restoration and dressing of the wound depend on the bone from which the fracture occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And apply that subsequent part that will be used for the rememoration of the wound.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If in the bone there are fractures, you must have an extension of this cut member, if it is the leg or the foot; or if the member is small, or a rope or a rope and the knee.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And if your position is in the place where you hold the member at the knee while the parts of the cut member are extended, you should know that you must return those hooks to their original position and to each part according to what can be placed there.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard that second point where you do not apply the force on the thigh for your operation of the bones or wounds; and know that the third power that you apply to one bone to another is better in other ways.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	When it is advantageous for you to touch at that time with your hand, and if you sometimes find another cause, correct that and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	When there is a strong extension and compression, it is necessary to follow the advice of skilled doctors who perform operations on visible parts of the body, or perform contractions on the affected member as they have seen in the operation of their own hands.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And if you properly annex, adjust, and perform the operation with proper care and stricture on that member, and rest and tranquility; place the bandage over it and make the stitch that does not harm that member in the time of its watch and during sleep, and see its revolution and movement, and you must excrete all its movements throughout all its virtue; and wait to see if the position of the member is in a position where the pain caused by it is secured when it is in the disposition of the position of the member or injury; then change that to another position of that which does not cause pain to the other; and keep that so that the position of that is dry and tight, so that the member does not suffer tortuosity when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the stricture of the member is that which you recommend; because you know that some members are differentiated in their appearance and size and form according to their kind.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	When those who are small as the arm and elbow are, and they seem to be like those, it is necessary to cover the envelope with a fine silk cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Those who have large thighs, such as the thigh or buttock, cover with a fine cloth to ensure that the envelope is tight and strong, connecting the large member to the entire part of the stricture, as there may be no space between them.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, placing your evacuation of equilibrium conveniently at that, pausing the limb over the location of that fracture am three or four times the envelope or member; and hold it tight with a small hand.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place your hand at that part of the departure from the location of the fracture, and hold it tight with a small hand that does not strain the stricture of the one you have strengthened at the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then elongate your hand to the envelope of the location of the fracture a little, and gradually soften the stricture bit by bit, until you hold a large part in your hand.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another knife and wrap the other vein around the location where you want to enclose it, and then see if the enclosures are at the end of the fracture; and your operation will be in the stricture of the enclosure and in the mollification of that second one that they have said in the first enclosure.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then pause between the feathers of the lion's stop or dragon that has an engorged tortuosity of the fracture if in it there is a tortuosity; and otherwise, do not pause in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then pause over the other knife, and engulf on those enclosures stellhas decently as much as possible, if in the location there is no inflammation or post-cautery, and you should pause over it that sede the post-cautery that will also cause the inflammation; and then let it alone for a while; and you should tighten on those stellhas.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And are the stellhas of the gut of the cane lady's race, and they should be formed correctly; or are of fust of pi; or of rams of palm; and is the width of each stellha according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, cover the plate that is placed over that fracture with a thick one and a thin one like the others, and the length of the stela according to what is legible from the member's magnitude and appearance; and apply pressure on the plates as another bandage as your first stricture; and the lia descends gently as they have said about the stricture, and it is your stricture according to the location of the fracture, and as the fracture extends, the stricture becomes more severe.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	When the sons are large and subtle, and many in number; and if the sons are large, then as you have seen in the operation of other wounds, when the strings of the tort are cut, and it is an error, when the stricture is not equal to the diameter.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	For subtle sons are not convenient, and you will not agree to it for the stricture that you want, and it is not necessary that between each other there be a certain distance.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the thigh is cut at the extremities of the stones according to the stricture in those places, then pause there for a while, whether it is leopard's skin or lamb's wool that comes between, which does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some visible fractures are in pain, and there are disruptions in the chain, and you will find in memory in that part of the capital second singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that the whole member is not straight when it is cut for the first time; the cause is that the member, when it is large, does not allow you to rest on the stones for at least four or seven days, according to your security of the appearance of gangrene.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the instrument used by ancients for treating fractures and dislocations, which they would place over the affected area.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	A splint for treating fractures, convenient for complex and major fractures in the thighs and legs, where no heat or cold is felt: and that is made of powdered flour, and the marrow of the grain which you must consider the movement of the bone in the husks of the grain.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And comfort that support as it is, but not with those who are cruel to the skin, and pause the comfort of the thin or subtle one; and instead use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another splint for treating fractures and dislocations: recipe of asafetida, of ladanum, of acacia, of unguent, and migrach, which is made of millet grain salve, of all dracs x; of mirra and aloe of all dracs v; alochil of all dracs xx; all the parts and pieces and crumbs of water alichil or album of huou if the thigh complex is scalped; and use this splint, which has good composition and restores fractured bones gently, and confirms the homes.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	1. Another application of warmth that soothes fractures and twists: recipe migach and apply a white ointment made with aloe and drac. x; with mire and drac. v; with acacia drac. vi; with arsenic ointment drac. xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	1. All these are made in a mortar with motive oil, and they are crumbled, and they are mixed with water or albumin of egg or with alcohol and they are administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	When treating joint pain and separating bones from their original locations, and addressing pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: hold the thread tightly and submerge it in warm oil and vinegar, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This ointment is not useful for restoration, but rather for cauterization and expelling pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another ointment for restoring cuts: use fresh willow bark needles and poppy seed salve; mix them all together and make the ointment.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A ointment for restoring bone fractures and when you want to resolve the aftermath of cauterization: mix aloe, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of erica, all parts except the roots, and make them into balls; they should be soft and have a pleasant scent if the member does not become inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If the member becomes inflamed, use cool aloe water or water and apply to the affected area.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another ointment for quick resolution that this first one does not have, when cauterization is severe and the member needs to be restored: mix aloe, linseed, balmroot, morsel, mint, violet flowers, camomile, all parts except the roots, and make them into balls; they should be soft and have a pleasant scent if the member does not become inflamed. The quality of the member and the color of the skin should determine which water to use for application.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May's Yopocras does not say that there is nothing to put on the member that needs restoration except wax and oil, and it recommends that it should be both larger and more delicate; and he says that it should be applied in this way.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	It is said that in Gualia, there are points on the member that are used for restoration and the causes of which cause dryness in small amounts, similar to those causes that have been recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A remedy to soothe wounds and alleviate pain: a mixture of honey, milk, hair of the sow or pennywort, and aloe vera, and salt divided into parts; it is applied and left to dry, and becomes a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The more the quantity follows the quality of the liquor that comes out and is considered if there is no pain, no excitement, and the bone is not broken, then the more it is useful in its place, you should not delay.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain or excitement or inflammation occurs at the site, you should apply or take it out in that hour, and remove the plaster from that part.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take some ginger and wet seaweed, submerge it in water, and let it be in the water until the excitement and pain are calmed; and after that, massage the member for an hour; and then place something red over the wet skin under the water and oil, and put it on the member again after you are sure of not having a post-operative scar, and to reduce inflammation in the member, and to relieve the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And you should repeat that subtle constriction, making it smaller and softer, and applying gentle pressure to the area where the initial injury was, and it will become healthier.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If at times the testicle and the scrotum swell, become inflamed, and experience pain and other accidents are common, and you are instructed to apply plaster and compression, then you should follow that approach as you have begun with the beginning of the engulfment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If no harm comes to the member from any of those things that have been said, then you should not remove it for less than three days or four or seven; and some are completely healed in twenty days after you have removed it according to what has been told you by the dissolution of the member, as they have said, until the fracture adheres, and it settles down to the coagulation of the flesh on that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And you adjust the compression to the stricture that is less than your original stricture, and you relax in the engulfment of the patient's thighs, according to what follows the remorse of the member.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If at times the location of the fracture has dried and become less inflamed than before, then you should know that this nutrient is prohibited from reaching there; and therefore, after three days, you should broth the meat you have seen there, and the stricture will be small, and for this operation the member receives nutrients, and becomes cured.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When the fracture of another bone is not restored at the beginning, it is covered and then restored according to its tortuosity, which leads to error in the operation of those who do it, and great fear, and if they are true, the ankles become larger in their freedom and they feel aversion to that which has been done.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, for it is reasonable that this does not work.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter second: Of fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The kinds of fractures are breaks, and their figures are various, and their causes are distinct. Four types of fractures are: one is caused by percussion of the skull, and the percussion comes from all the bones entering into the cranium, which we remove with forceps, as is done in the shoulder, and for this reason this kind is called excision; or the skull penetrates a part of the bone, and penetrates the flesh and does not pass through the penetration to the end of the bone; and this kind of fracture is called complete dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	When the plague of these bone fractures is great or small, and those that are contractioned or atricated; and causes for their pain are burning or chilliness over the skin, and they appear to be so to them.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	Is this fracture or one that has already penetrated into the condyle that was left of the bone; or is it in the face of the bone, and the pain of these bone fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	If this fracture is one that has been hidden in the bone, in the slightness of the small hair, and for that this special hidden fracture is called.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is made by chilliness or by pressure on the skin, which causes any lamina of the bone to be inserted in the parts of the dintils at the concave location as they happened to the payroles of erams when they were struck and parted from their parts of the dintils.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is truly made in the bones of the human body, as it happens with the caps of eggs.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	When all of these species of fractures are considered, they are considered as separate pieces like stelhas.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find all of this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you will know all of these species of fracture by detection over those and by investigation of their tendons and cartilage that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a specific capillary is known by what is discovered over the bones, and it is washed away, and it lines on the tendon, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture, the beginning of the accidents of the thigh is considered, and it is laboriously done if the accidents that signify by their significance are manifest on the body, such as vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of the tooth, and sinus, and fever acute, and edema of the limbs, and symptoms similar to those of the accidents in the major parts, and its treatment is not cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if sometimes non-corresponding accidents occur, you hope for health, then start the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if you come to me with the disease as it is at the beginning and as it is in the days of winter, you will find that I study in the bone of the hip on the day twelvth hour total disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If in the summer days, you cover the joints with cloth or bandages, keeping them on for seven days, knowing that the bones are becoming corrupted by the pannicol and that accidents may occur due to this.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has already permeated the pannicol and covers the brain, and is divided into small and irregular parts, you should cover the infected and torn part with cloth, as you advise me to do.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	If it is that your race has plague on the thighs, and you uncover the bones according to custom and with your hands as much as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be above the thigh.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you happen to discover the bone, if there are clots or aphcema, then you should cover the area with what you have, and it is that you must compress the place where infusions of draps infused in vinegar and olive oil are placed, and when the aphcema is sedated, you should be sure of the flow of the sanc; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in the ablation of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the second maneuver is that you insert the knife into the bone as straight as possible, and this is the form of it: And then administer another knife into this, a small push pin that is; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	When administering the anesthesia, use the needle that corresponds to the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you need several names of scalpels, of which some are sharp and others are not; and they should be thin and their edges should be sharp and pointy, and they can be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily by striking the scalpel with it, without hurting the head and leading to the edge.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are hard and strong, then use several needles that you insert into the circuit of the patient's body where you administer the anesthesia, which are called non-penetrating needles.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called quills but rather four points that do not touch the end of the bone as much as possible, so that the edge of the taravel is rounded or has a margin over it, which prevents being submerged and passing through the sponginess of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take a large number of these needles, as many as are needed for the spine of each bone, taking into account that the extremity of the one that is sharp is the most acute, and the quantity in length and brevity is second to the quantity of the spiciness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of teravels: The quality of piercing into the circuit of the cut bone is that you place the teravel on the bones and revolve it around those parts until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the teravel to another location, and pause there as much as possible within the entire amount of the thickness of the ring or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And you insert the blade into that which is between every part of the bone, and make it subtle so that you can cut on its surface without lifting the blade, as they have said, when you have reached the bone, or your hand, or another cause for those parts which will appear at that point, as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to guard the blade with all caution that it does not touch any cause of the cipher.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when the blade has passed through the bone and is separated from the cipher if continued on it, and that is extracted, be sure to raise and close it in the roughness of the bone that is in the blade as another tool, but rather be careful not to make it too sharp as the other blades.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If you encounter any fragmentation of the small bones and joints, then take hold of that with ease as it is your duty to treat them; and then cure the pain in the limbs and find out which ones have been injured.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other hand of the operation is longer, taking more time, which is praised by Guy de Champagne and is praised for its great skill; and this is the saying of the matter: it is necessary for you at the beginning to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is strong and manifest, when you have discovered that part and have paused there at the extremity of this lent and gentle suture of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular part is like a lion and does not have any cause, and the sharp part is in two places at a distance, as sometimes; that the lenticular part should be adjusted to the cipher on the face of the sharp part in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And if you cut through the suture of a part that is small and has not been completely closed, and you are sure that no panicle will happen in this accident that you fear in this operation, and if the physician 14 was the fol of all men and their great ignorance, certainly, and if he was drunk.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When some cause is attached to the bone of the ankle in certain places of the bones, it will be found that this is due to the lenticular part of the gout, and it will be easier to remove it, as well as the other diseases and pains.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the ankle, and it is separated or remains on the bone, and there are sharp edges and subtle spurs on the face of the bone, it will be seen that those sharp edges and subtle spurs have been covered with razor-like sharpness by the preparations you have made for various quantities in order to be able to administer the correct amount of those at all locations, as well as the pus convenient for them and the pus second to that in which you left off after cutting the bone and the figure of the patient.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And cover that you administer in your reason with the one that covers the bones at the beginning with the purulent pus of those razor-like sharpness, and use as much of the subtle pus of the patient, and do not stop giving until you have given all the purulent pus of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	When in any of the other small hairline fractures and subtle fractures, follow the treatment that you have lost after correcting the position of the bone.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because not all who have studied in that art are equally skilled.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it is based on that we have written that they have shown themselves in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the tendon is tight when you reduce the bone, it is recommended that you take a piece of cloth of the same size as the amount of pus, and submerge it in warm olive oil, and place it over the orifice of the abscess; and take another piece of folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in warm olive oil and place it over the first piece of cloth and apply a pressure that does not harm the tendon, and administer to the cloth that is over the abscess and do not compress it only by the amount of pus you have.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And continue this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the healing of the cut; and then remove it and administer medicines that are superfluous in hydration, such as linen and flour of errors, powder of ensel and aristology, and similar substances like those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is necessary to make these powders of this kind that they are finely ground over the plague, as they are dry; and universally, they are administered in that entire medicine of which it is a property that it cleanses and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep in mind that the plague in your treatment is not clean; and it should not be in its surmise of engorgement nor another; nor should it add virulence to it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and pours into it, and spreads over the thighs as this malignant malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And spreads over the philtrum of the head, as the bone of the skull is made rough by it when the cure of it is applied, and darkens on its surface; and therefore consider that if it spreads to the thighs those accidents that have been told you are true.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not darken black but from the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that it darkens black, you should know that you take one part of honey and three parts of red oil, and apply those lines over the philtrum, and place that over the forehead; and cure that with the specials of the cure that are suitable when it is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	I apologize, but the provided text does not contain a sentence
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	This line translates to: "Of the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	This line translates to: "You know that the nose is not cut, but rather it is made up of divided parts, such as one or more bones, with the part you have two osselets, and the cartilaginous part is not cut, and does not accrue, nor is it affected by atrophy and tortuosity and synovial fluid.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	This line translates to: "If one of the parts of the nose is cut, you should know that you introduce the small instrument into the nose, and that it heals the fracture according to the indicated point, and according to the deformed part, and then it returns the nose to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	This line translates to: "And it is called so for your convenience, and remember that you do not cut for your own operation on the thighs.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	This line translates to: "And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the dit does not pervade to that, you should know that it should be equal at the extremity of the ray where it is small.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in two parts, you should make it appear as if this were the case.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	If you want to restore the bone in the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, make sure to apply about one or two drops of olive oil to the area where the stitching was done.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a mecatome in the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two clamps, if the fracture is in two parts, and use as many as necessary to fill the cavity of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And after the first restoration, if the clamps are wrapped in albumen and moved every day, without it being visible to me; having covered the meca with powdered plaster; and laying the bandage inside so that the bone is fixed and the cartilage is endurable.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And if some wounds are in the nose, instead of clamps, use a piece of leather that is wrapped in thread; and it should be that the fracture of the nose has been very severe and that the chest is not prohibited for inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, make incisions, and if you wish, make burns.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If another inflammation of the skin occurs after applying cauterization, apply a plaster made of the fat or fatty tissue of the thigh, or a poultice of the same color as the skin.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If there is no inflammation of the skin after applying cauterization, you should apply a paste made of flour and powdered eschscholzia to the affected area, and place a bandage over it, avoiding any cause of inflammation.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the nose bones are broken or fractured, you should cut around them, extract them if possible, and then clean the area with instruments suitable for that; afterwards, close the wound with a plaster made of the same color as the skin, and care for it until it encrusts and solidifies.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If the nose becomes inflamed, you should clean it with saliva or warm water, and administer intravenous fluids if necessary to maintain its health.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	If the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, you should observe if the fracture is deformed only, and not split in two and curved at the corners of the teeth, then your diagnosis will be lighter.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	When the fracture is in the lateral part of the leg, you should introduce the left indicum into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is in the medial part of the mandible, you should introduce the right indicum into the mouth of the patient; and push it gently to facilitate the reduction of the fracture, which will be easier in the adjacent part of the bone, in the other part of the bone of the adjacent segment; it will be equally to these.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the mandible fracture has already been separated into halves, you should cover that you administer extensions of parts in a straight line, following the possibility of equalization.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you happen to have a fracture of the teeth at disruption, you should tighten those that seem to be pulled by gold or silver wire or by alloy; and place your hand on the disrupted mandible, on the second part, on the lower lip, and on the large staple gently, or a needle of sole thread according to the length of the mandible, and according to what you have arranged for the reduction and that does not destroy.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	When ordering the patient to rest and remain calm, and stop eating the food of the four seasons.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you suspect that the figure has changed in any way, then you should cut and dissect it on the third day; and then correct this by comparing it to the original form of the body, using powder of moly, album of honey, or flour of cinnamon, which you would have kept as a sample of the body, and place it over the lion's fur.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when you have attached and adjusted this plaster to the body, and the position of the bone is not changed, leave it, as long as it is healed and strengthens the fracture; four weeks later, this fracture is strained.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another accident occurs after the cauterization, then you should administer the medication that has been given in the session of the patient as soon as it is healed, and it will be useful for that wound.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is infected, then you should consider whether it is due to the separation of the bone or bones, and you should carefully separate those parts using that which is most suitable for the removal of those from the sturments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the orifice of the abscess is straight, you should enlarge it according to the quantity of your need, following the flesh.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have finished sewing those stitches, and if they do not cause much pain, then you can continue to perform the amputation if necessary; otherwise, stop and place your hand on one of the pressure points that correspond to that area and enter when it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol v. (Latin) means "capital" or 
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada (Latin) means "restoration of the shoulder when it is fractured." In English,
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en uma de tres manieyras (Latin) means "If the shoulder is twisted, the shoulder blade is torn from the bone, and this fracture occurs in one of three directions." In English,
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es separada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua (Latin) means "If the shoulder is torn, separated, or separated into two parts that do not cause pain, it is considered for restoration; or if it is injured in those areas and difficult to restore, or if the fracture is infected." In English,
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In the operation in that case, when the fracture is discovered, it is that you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the assistant and follows the broken end, and the other extends the collar to that section.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	When the fracture is located within the area that appears to be the form of the second part of the body, and it is not in the eminence or concavity, then engage it with care.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you need extension, then cover the foot with a cloth or linen, and make it as large as possible according to the amount of your necessity; extend and raise the clavicle and straighten the shoulder, holding the fracture in place that covers it according to what has been said.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot extend the shoulder to the ends of the clavicle, then cover that which has been bent over the neck, and place it on the muscle of the foot with a cushion that is larger in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The surgeon presses the muscle of the foot on the parts that have been raised above the shoulder, and then corrects the fracture and holds it according to what has been said.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain in the shoulder and muscles, then cover that area and remove those pains as much as possible for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is held in the bone, then you must carve an incision in the flesh of one of the incisors that you have seen on this side, because you had stopped the tail of the sturment that serves the cipher; and the sturment is made of flint or iron, and this is the shape of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It seems like a blade of the kind that this is the concavity; and its length according to this is what you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thickness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	May the length of it be as you can according to your ability in the operation; that there may be ends attached as many times as possible, and one end may be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the plague that you have carved is wide when you have extracted the cartilage of the bone, and it is certain to be infected with cauterization, then you must adjust the lips of the plague according to the suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear cauterization, then you must fill the plague with cloths and powders according to the amount of the cut in the plague.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you happen to have an abscess, you should inform the physician immediately, as it is often accompanied by redness and swelling in the affected area, and then stop the treatment.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the joint becomes inflamed and swollen, it is necessary to apply a plaster made of flour from the albumen of an egg, and place it over the affected area, and then cover the wound with a layer of linen, and if necessary, cover the wound with a piece of silk of the same length as the joint or slightly longer, and place another layer of linen on top of the plaster; and then wrap the silk around the joint, and wrap the joint around the silk on the location of the fracture, and keep the area moist as it heals, and rewrap the silk over the collar of the leg and the affected part of the thigh, and reduce the silk over the entire area, and if at times the stricture of the fracture is in the stricture of the joint, it is necessary to know that it is not hidden under the clothing.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And so, do not let the pelvis be out of place; and for this purpose, whenever you see the patient every day, when the limb is softened or the pelvis is already damaged, then you should correct this and tighten the ligament.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then, stop the patient's sleeping on the chest, and stop there the thighs' titillation, and let the patient sleep in the bed with a small pillow; so that if that is elevated the helper of the patient from the neck of that, and thus the fracture of the shoulder is elevated to the muscle's elevation; or if the arm of the patient is at the chest of that.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not cut the ligament if it does not happen in the right or posterior compartment, enter within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And if you have seen the face of the patient after the operation, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave when it is restored and the fracture of the shoulder is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable after the twenty-eighth day, and some are watched in other men's time for that.
Capitol .vi.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in Latin
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	This line translates to "On the restoration of a shoulder fracture." It seems to be a title or heading for the following
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	This line translates to "The spatula is cut at the location of the wound and not at the edges." It appears to be a instruction or guideline for a medical procedure.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	This line translates to "And when the wound is cut — and it is cut at the deepest point — and not by touch, then follow the figure of the fractured bone with the preparation of the tool and reduce that figure to its natural form in the entire range of movement of the limb that you can possibly achieve." This seems to be a continuation of the instructions for treating a shoulder fracture.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	This line translates to "And then cover the area with powder of almond oil and lemon; and then apply a drop of double-distilled water; and then cover the stem of the table with subtle silk according to the amount of the spatula or less." This seems to be a continuation of the instructions for treating a shoulder fracture, possibly related to applying a topical treatment.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	This line translates to "If the stem is now concave in the corners of the spatula's wounds, then you should cut that concavity with lemon, and it may be possible to make the stem equal." This seems to be a continuation of the instructions for treating a shoulder fracture, possibly related to shaping the stem of the tool.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	When it is necessary to apply pressure to the affected area, apply firm pressure with wet humors that are not too tight and do not cause pain in the joints.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Consider the limit in each day; and all watched that is softened, another watch and straighten the knee if it causes pain in the joints.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And wrap the thigh over the seat.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spoon is restored in 20 days or in .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	When this number is completed, you dissolve the limit, and you know surely that it is of bones from which the beginning is not known nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed to the location of the knee and clean the codon, then you dissect over it, take it out, and follow what has been said in the fracture of the sternum of the Achilles tendon caut if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest sometimes breaks in the middle of the body and then bends in different directions; but the ends of the bones are always hard and not comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When the accident of the patient occurs when the thigh of the patient is cut, it descends to the parts of the fingers and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and much fever and vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the cut bone and not concealed from the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the leg is that it should be placed face down on the patient's back, and a cushion should be placed between the thighs of a cushion; and it is necessary to press the muscles of the leg, and adjust the costals of the leg as much as possible in the two costals, and subtly guide you in the operation of the leg and the equilibrium throughout the entire hand that can be used and that suits for this, until when the figure of the bone is restored to its original position.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	When you have paused over the plaster and stopped, and paused over the table's subtle carving of ivory or silver and as it seems to levitate, push that away; and subtly place yourself on that over the cut bone that is not marred; and keep going with your hand along the ridge of the back, and tighten that stricture gently; and consider the plaster in total, and when it is softened, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If necessary, cause some erosion or irritation, pain, or ecchymosis that occurs in that place, then cut and remove that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what happens due to the hand of treatment for the curative manieyra; and reduce the plaster, if sometimes it is the face; and adjust the stricture within when it is healthy.
Capitol .viii.	Capitulum VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of the ribs when they are twisted.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a rib fracture does not happen except in large locations that the two sides hit, and from the ends of them in the part where none of those contractions occur but rather by those cartilages.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	I recognize that the matter is not avoided due to the desire of the physician for the patient.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration is made as soon as the fracture is closed by the physician according to the most possible method, but if it is not closed according to the least, and the broken bone is pressed and held firmly with plaster and bandages, then it is indicated for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture is declining to the parts of the dentaries, you should go to the buttocks with severe pain and puncture, as if you had punctured someone else, and for that reason to pull the glove; and you should go through this difficulty of anus, stomach, and vomiting of the mouth; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the antics were invented in that time for the purpose of preventing vomiting.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of their saying: that you should pause the walks of the thighs which generate inflammation and distension, because the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pressed to the parts devoted.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	When we have not caused this for something that would generate apoplexy, and if it has already happened, then help with this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They closed the wound with a bandage that was not too tight and, as it seemed reasonable, but nevertheless feared that the wind would drive the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They closed the wound with a bandage that was not too tight and, as it seemed reasonable, but nevertheless feared that the wind would drive the superfluities to the place due to weakness. They filled the cavity with lint that had been soaked in olive oil, and placed a bandage over it, making sure that the wound was not open when they removed it for the second time; and they treated the thigh with care, both for food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the thigh is very painful and does not suffer, and the doctor punctures the membrane with a needle, they fear for the thigh, and they cover the wound with a bandage, discover the edge of the costa, and place the instrument on the membrane that preserves the cipher, the rememoration of which is preceded, and they extract the oils that are easily extracted, and take out the wound.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	When it comes to adjusting the mouth of the plague, if it is large, use a poultice made of ointment and apply it within the mouth once it has healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have an abscess on the hand, then cut off the pus and sprinkle pulverized red ochre on it, and hold it over the wound to treat the abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	If you are bitten by a snake on the leg, once it has healed, then enter the poisonous substance and treat the wound.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol, Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of spinal fractures of the two and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes there are fractures of the bones of the neck, and they appear to be in the trapezius muscle, and seem to be in the spine of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when you want to know if it will be cured or not, consider whether the bones are still hard and stiff and dead and cannot be moved, extended, or stretched, and when you compress them with your fingers or puncture them with a needle and do not feel any pain in them, then you know that it is not healing, and in the months of dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If any pain is felt in those and the parts where the teeth are and points are made, you should know that the nail of the bone is saved and that the thigh is rarely affected by inflammation.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see the spines of the back and want to know if they are healthy or not, consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that they are already softened, go to those who are affected in the most painful parts, and when you lie on your side, notice that some parts are retracted over the pubic bone and cannot urinate, you should know that it is fatal and not to be treated by a doctor.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If you do not find any cause for those, the cause is better and there is less pain.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of the patient is that you pierce at the seat of the acupuncture point that you place over the spine that is red or has mucus, or as if it were sedated; lie on that one and notice some parts enter when the acupuncture point is sated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	When you stop one of the comforting and enduring ointments and apply it to that part; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the part where the pain is most intense until it is cured.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you accidentally cut the bone of the hip or any other separated part, cover that wound with a cloth and keep it there; then adjust the corners of the wound with a sutura if it is large; and then care for that am alcu encarnatiu of the enguentz, until it is cured.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the bone of the hip is split and the end of the femur is exposed, cover that wound with a piece of cloth from the other thigh and tie it around; then apply the ointment and bandage, as instructed by the doctor, and hold it in place.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel the hip bone is split, cover that wound with a piece of cloth and remove it, and care for the wound until the cure preceded by the doctor is cured.
Capitol .x.	Capitol is not a standard medical term in Latin, It
De restauracio de la ancha.	De restauracio de la ancha translates to "restoration of the wide" in English
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the thighs are so thin, and if they break, their fracture is not simply a communication at the extremities but is inscribed in the longitudinal and declinate parts of the dentition; and it causes pain in the thigh and puncture, and the camba is stunned when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of the wide is that you extend your hand over that which is over the fracture, which is the figure of the wedge.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the end of the thigh only, then you should cut it off secondly, as it is apparent to you by equality cutting that which is assembled according to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long or if it has declined to the parts of the dentition, then you should place your hand on the patient's abdomen over which you have prepared the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have cut it off, place your hand on the plaster, and pause over that support of lead or chain, and press firmly on the part where you are not afraid of puncture of the fracture or movement of the stump.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	When the patient lies down on their side or stomach, command them to lie down on their side or stomach.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If you encounter an asthma attack, stop extending the chest and its restoration as soon as the asthma attack is sedated, and place your hand on the side that was previously pressed; then return to the restoration of the chest, and stretch that arm as much as possible.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you encounter broken or cracked bones, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the helper.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The helper is that which is between the thigh and the shoulder cap of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of the helper is in one of two hands, of which the one that you hold is the one that should be pressed firmly according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 They are connected by two tendons, and they should be suspended from the raised location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	You should follow the thigh over a pillow; and then let go of the extended arm that has been placed on the inside of the joint, which comes out at the ankle of the limb where the curve of the bone is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend it over that heavy cause, or the minister extends it to the adjacent parts; and the surgeon and the fracture of the bones more severe, within which the fracture returns as soon as it is covered.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other hand is that the pillow should be pressed against the cervical spine and suspend the collar of the neck; and command two ministers to hold it so that the fracture of the bones is covered by one, and the other holds the other end of the limb; and they extend their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be strong, hold firmly on the fracture of the limb and on the other limb, and let the two surgeons extend their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, hold that the extension of the limb is placed on the hip and the other part of the fracture is held by the hand.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	When it appears that the fracture is at the knee, then you should place a pad under the limb over that spot and that leg.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	When you open that ease and work on it, and as much as you can open it afterward, without causing any harm, and apply it well, you will find that the cautery does not cause any pain.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you do not have pain from the cautery, you will loosen the suture in the seventh day, and place something over the wet and red part that appears after the cessation of the pain, and you will hold it tight.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the tool for tightening that is placed over the fracture is plaster, and it is placed over it in an enveloping way with a cloth; and you adjust the arm over that helper, and place your hand over the affected muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and tighten over the helper arm so that the arm is in place of the splint, if not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And you use a splint.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you place the splint over the fracture that is pushed in and pushed firmly by the other splints; and it is placed between each splint the latitude of the point, and the longitude of the splints according to the fracture added by three points of the total part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then apply pressure over the bones with the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your stricture at the site of the fracture must be tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is aligned, the stricture becomes smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you sometimes notice the situation of the bones and the stricture as they have said in the hour when you restore the member to its natural position, then you do.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear anphylaxis, apply the stricture and bones enter the day after as they have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And after three days consider the liament in all parts, and if there is no inflammation or swelling, or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to superfluous stricture, then correct everything according to what has been said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are concerned that no cause has been found for this, do not delay the application of the plaster for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And is that his sleep on the back is over the member's head, and the rest of the body is over the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And pause upon the assistant's full belly of wool, and consider in total or partial daytime or night that no figure of the cut member is delirious or dissolved, or that the limb is softened, therefore correct everything as much as your virtue allows.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the diet of the patient according to the order that has been given, namely that the diet is subtle at the beginning and becomes denser as it progresses; and you should cover the diet of the patient.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four days of the assistant and the patient's constipation are common, and you should cover that they are loosened and administered with food and medicine to those who correct the latter.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is layha atrita, you should not take out the pins or staples within a day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is made of two bones which are called the humerus; of these, one is small and is that which is located at the top, and the other is large and is that which is located at the end of the small one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger humerus is cut only slightly, or the smaller one, and very few are cut.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller humerus is cut, you restore the fracture of the elbow and the surgery of the elbow is also placed in the same position.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the bone of the foot is broken and the treatment is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	It is worse when bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	If the small toe is broken, it is convenient for the doctor to apply a splint, and then restore the position of the bone, which is easier to extend with the foot open.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the large toe is broken, it is necessary to apply a strong stretch.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both toes are broken, you should apply a strong pull.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you should apply the restoration of the foot and the extended stretch over a cushion, with the fingers on the parts that are not covered by the other parts, as all others say, and the ear is placed below the other parts, and the ankle is supported on a flat board.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if a cushion is placed under the foot in the arch or heel of the foot, so that the ankle does not press against it.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the surgeon extends the arm of the part that is pushed away from the shoulder or elbow, and another surgeon does the same.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	When the physician examines the joint, he should open it as much as possible, choosing the best figure that can be.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the facture of the bone there are sharp edges, then you should carefully cut off all the piece in the desired location to maintain your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If in the separated part of the bone there is a cut through the tendon and it is not as expected for the restoration of the bone, then you should apply to it and leave that second hand with which they have told you to do so.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is in pain, and I have already made this capital single case, then take the cauterization of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you encounter an apothem at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth made of olive oil and white wax, and it should be more precise and subtle than the previous ones, and press the cloth on that subtle opening when the apothem is about to come out; and take the wax and pause the prepared powder of clay earth, and then stop the sticks; and that stick should be placed over the fractured part with a little bit of red and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You already know that the number of stars in the arm you saw in the major positions, or is it a fracture in a single bone or in two bones?
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then stop the stricture on the location of the fracture with firm pressure, and when fewer parts of the fracture or lower parts are being extirpated, stop the stricture as soon as possible after the rememoration of the patient at the beginning of the capitol.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The dressings that encircle the fracture are very humid, not hard or sharp, and the one that is most suitable for it is of a subtle and gross nature, as has been recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member and the limb for the appropriate number of days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs that requires rectification, act as promptly as possible with the cause that occurs in the member, and cover the member with water to keep it moist until the end of that impulse.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not let the member contract after the pause, and return the stricture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the extension has already been softened and the bone has been made stronger and seems to be in line with those, then you should straighten everything as much as possible with your own virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	E considera mays if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to superfluity of stricture, then you should know that this member becomes soft and less resistant over time as the nutrient runs to it, and strengthens it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	E if there is no cause for those that have been said to happen in the thighs, then you should not know that it has slid within the next twenty days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And if you hang the thigh up by its own virtue of movement, and make it sleep on the soft pillow.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or sixty-two days, or twenty-eight days, and then it follows the order of the complexes and the order of virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the thigh and of the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that at the base of the neck and among the bones of the skull, and not happen to them except visible movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when fracture or dislocation occurs in the neck, you should cover the bad with a cloth and press on it with your hand, and then hold the head over that extended area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And if the extension extends the bones, then place the knife on those parts that are not hard.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And you should cover that with plaster and stop it if there is no attack of gout; and then hold it over the area according to its quantity, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is in the parts of the fingers, then make it seem like a hope for cloth, and command the head to hold that with its hand, and make it stronger than the cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And is the case that the cloth is held by the hand, because the hand is applied to the finger; and hold it according to what you cover.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the wrong part, then you must cover that part with a pillow and another pillow on top of it to make it wider and more comfortable; and place a bandage around it, as it is rolled up between the two limbs.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you happen to break a tooth of the teeth, then cover it with a piece of cloth and secure it with a thread as much as possible, and if it is necessary, place a small pillow under it so that the fracture is elevated and not painful.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other parts of the body, such as the neck, ear, or anus, then cover it with a piece of cloth and secure it as much as possible, or tie it together with a thread, as they say in the case of the pillow. Or place a small pillow over it, as they have said in the case of the pillow.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and that is, the arrangement of apposition and opposition of the cautery — as I have said in the second operation — that it covers when any cause occurs of those, according to what is told in the story of the cautery.
Capitol .xiv.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided does not contain a
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	The translation of "De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa" is "Of the restoration of a bone fracture of the
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The translation of "Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana" is:
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the part is made as follows: one bandage is placed over the fracture and another bandage further down the fracture, and the thigh is laid down on the patient's belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The surgeon extends the bandage as much as possible according to the quality of the bone in the location of the fracture.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is necessary to straighten the knee, then the bandage should be placed at the knee joint, and the other bandage should be placed further down the fracture, so that the extension catches on, and the other bandage covers the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the fracture is directly above the ankle, then the bandage should be placed at the ankle joint, and the extension should be made at the other parts.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And the surgeon should align the bone as much as possible with the larger parts, reducing the fracture according to the similarities and the bone is conjoined by good union; then cover the joints and strictures, if not causing damage to the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If damage occurs to the member, then you should treat it for several days until the apostematous part is loose, and return to your usual care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The stricture of the patient's injury is that a hard bend covers the fracture, doubles over its two or three veins, and remains due to the superfluity; and it envelops the cavity within which the blood and the flesh of the thigh and leg are located.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	E introduce long and narrow wire between the thigh and the cavity of the denol at the parts where the ends are located, and bring out the ends of the wire from the opposite side, and rotate it over the cavity and the thigh as much as necessary due to the superfluity of the bend.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	E place your hand over the thigh at the location of that astelhas fracture, and place a stone over the bones of the cavity.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	E fill the spaces between the cavity and the thigh with cloths many, so that the stricture is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	E begin the stricture with a hard bandage over the location of the fracture in three or four folds, and as you remove the bandage from the location of the fracture, your stricture will be smaller and less tight, and it will be easier to remove.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And extend the ends of the intestine to the parts that come in front of the cavity of the foot, and tighten the ends of the other part so that the limb is not loose in its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And apply the structure over that, so that it does not cause inflammation in the limb or tendon rupture, or emflacio and similar symptoms for those; and if it causes any of those causes, then cut me a piece from it, and correct what has happened totally, according to what has been said by the doctors.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is pain in that which holds it together, then you understand that this second one is possible for you; otherwise, cover that part with something and let it remain there, and cure what comes after the rememoration when it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And if some ways are tightened this fracture of the thigh or another that is adjusted to those bones, then as has been said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of that, it does not cause claudication in the thigh; and if it is restored alone or another is applied to the other part, then you must have claudication in that which has been stretched.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You must know that the thigh is tight for fourteen days or a few months, and this depends entirely on the variety of the compositions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not in the same format as the previous examples. It seems to be a single sentence rather than a line-by-line translation. If you could provide
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not in the same format as the previous examples. It seems to be a single sentence rather than a line-by-line translation. If you could provide the entire text or more context, I would be happy to help translate it for you.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not in the same format as the previous examples. It seems to be a single sentence rather than a line-by-line translation. If you could provide the entire text or more context, I would be happy to help translate it for you.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not in the same format as the previous examples. It seems to be a single sentence rather than a line-by-line translation. If you could provide the entire text or more context, I would be happy to help translate it for you.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not in the same format as the previous examples. It seems to be a single sentence rather than a line-by-line translation. If you could provide the entire text or more context, I would be happy to help translate it for you.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	When considering all the dispositions that have been recommended for other fractures, it is important to remember that cauterization is often used and should be done in a similar manner as this one, which is convenient if it is beneficial for the patient's health.
Capitol .xvi.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	De restauracio de la fractura de la camba" translates to "Restoration of the fracture of the pelvis
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil." translates to "You know that in the pelvis there are two bones of which one is large and is named after the pelvis itself; and the other is thin and is named 'girdle'.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aqo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una." translates to "And when fractures occur in the species of the bones that occur in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason a restoration is made of the affected part as in the restoration of the arm engagement, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas." translates to "And if the three bones are twisted, the pelvis is converted into all its parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant." translates to "And if the small bone is twisted, the pelvis is converted into the parts of Denant.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the hip bones are twisted, that part will be affected, and it is one of those causes that you have not yet noticed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And properly administer extension, stability, and ligamentous support according to that injury.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the femur is not accompanied by movements of agony, then extension should be more forceful and lesser leverage, and it will be better for your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if there is any cause for operation on the shoulder, and it happens when you dislocate the bones and that complicates the entire operation, then you will take iron nails of the quality that are placed in front of those causes that are placed in front of them, and so their edges are branched; alleviate those for those that have a slight rash, and do not be afraid of the hands, and it should be as long as the length of the shoulder, and the denol should enter into the joint.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And if you wrap around each layer according to the length of the bone, and place one on the part of the femur of one side and the other on the other side, and they are the denol entering into the joint below the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	If you have the forceps in three locations on the extremities and at the middle location, then this structure is forbidden by clinical practice on both sides of the face, and it is for good reason.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And an injection of lead has already been given according to the length of the chamber; and it is placed in the chamber by itself, which preserves that of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And above all, do not make this on fracture, and when it truly happens.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider the chamber in every day and study that for its better understanding, and you guard it from apostema and inflammation or other causes seeming; and when any cause of those occurs, you should stop what you are doing as soon as possible that it may be cured.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Not all ankle fractures occur; fewer foot bone fractures occur, and toes do not often fracture, but only twist.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	If the bones of the foot are broken and sometimes these bones are raised above each other, then the foot's joint should be paused on the prepared earth as is customary.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot on the earth that is raised over those bones, and sharpen those, and pull them in order to turn them within their sockets.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place a plaster and stop on the foot, and place on the belly of the foot a small table with two plates.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tighten that around the foot with the structure in place, as you have enveloped it with wraps and other causes of which it indicates.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when they have passed three days or four, you will remove the plaster, and then you will find the bones engaged, whether they are crushed, dislocated, or in their place, and the operation will be done on them with caution.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If they are found to be dislocated, you will restore them, and pull them back in the same way as I have advised you in the restoration of those that were dislocated.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then pause the second part of this line after the length of this one, and put a little of this on it; and then the foot of this table that you have recommended to you, and tighten that in a proper way.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If it is that the bones are two or three or more, then you must pause on each part of the table according to its quantity wrapped in a leopard skin, and tighten the table on the base of the foot, and be stationary over one of the caps of the table for the stomach of the foot so that it holds well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to overlook that you do not consider all the causes that they have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that they have said; and pause until you have completely recovered from this one that is causing you pain.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the hip bone and the penile bone and the thigh bone of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone of the woman is fractured, then make that cut in that direction, and then lean it on the other side a little, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	When the midwife cuts the cord, and it is placed in the child's mouth as expected; and when the woman is cut, and her back is lifted up, little by little, until all of this is forgotten inside where the part of the cord that was supposed to be in the child's mouth is, and the thigh returns to its original position.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place powder on the back of the child, and when you want to urinate, make the cord easier and then urinate, and reduce and return that second pillow to the hand that was first placed there, and return the first powder pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And keep the child's bottom clean for seven days or until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you want, take once a gauze and press on the anus of the child with a cannula of wax; and enter the entire bag into the child's womb, and inflate it as much as possible inside where the bag returns to its original position when the vesica is inflated by the womb.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And make sure it is filled with cord and stay for several days after they have recommended it, until it is healthy.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bones of a man or woman are split, administer treatment and apply the water that has been recommended for the bone of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that water is not hidden in these immediate fractures and does not end, mainly because of the one to which you refer and study; four, that fracture means to you in the largest possible way in restoration and in stricture of the bone, and therefore understand it.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the genitals of a man when they are split, take guarguamela from any place, and put the genitals in that; and place a bandage over the surrounding skin, and wrap it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be cured.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are plagued.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for that to which the fracture has occurred, and mainly if the bones are large as those of the thigh or of the supporter, or seem to be that, which you cut and suture as much as those conditions of sutures allow at you or testify similar as they have said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the plague flows out, you should cover yourself with the retention of the dust that you sprinkle over the affected area, if there is no other cause present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begins to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong this, if there is no stroke.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If there is a stroke, you should continue the restoration of the fracture within the nine days, within which the stroke allows, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause other accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone protrudes above the abdominal wall, you should cover that and cut it to reduce it and open it as much as possible with ease and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not prepared and the force of the limb is greater than the strength of your muscles, you should reduce that as much as possible with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight fingers, and its latitude is according to the amount of the plague; and for this the surgeon must take from those three or four according to the amount you indicate in the treatment throughout the type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	When making an incision, and there is little resistance so that it does not need to be bent at that time during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be sharp at the end that is marked in the outer edges; and it should be the desus of the leg, and the maytat of the leg goes into the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because the end of it should be raised above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press that in a vein that returns the bone, and it should be tied at any equacio.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then try to tie the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of it is cut, and not pregnant with the sturment for good exception, you should know that you have inserted the end of that bone inside that instrument has power to do this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone of all as much as they have recommended, then insert it inside that as much as you can that covers from those inscizoris which have said; or sharpen that am a little with one of the serras in any manieyra as possible.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And so much to that which is Roman in the bones and sharp spurs.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced, and the reduction of the leg causes great pain, you should know that the bone will not return to its natural position; and then do as you have done for the leg, but make it larger in size.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed your restoration of the bone that you made for the leg, and you submerge the drape in black sterile ointment, and if it is summer, and you do not remain on the plague or any other cause from which it may arise, so that it will not add to inflammation and decay.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And provide support in the hour of the highest complement of the bone restoration, and discover the plague that has been discovered, which has been infected by the wound and used according to the quantity of the plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And keep all caution not to strain the plague at the fracture, where no more than five motas can be made by the doctors, and do not add to the death or decay of the bones, so it is sinful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the second stricture is shorter, softer, and different from the strictures of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the plague is large or malignant, and one fears that bad accidents have occurred, and pain occurs in that area, then doctors do not cover that parts with clothing, less because of those hard sheets in the place of sticks and to tighten them more.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the plague has already started to appear, that is, if it has been born from a wound, then you should keep the cloth that was previously placed over it, and apply calicines, which are our customary remedies for plagues, as we find tetrafarmacons and similar things like this.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is advisable to you that you peel the limb and consider the plague in every day and evening that it is consolidated and closed, and cover that member so that it is prepared in such a way that the scarring runs from the part to the parts that are easy to reach.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If to the plague pass days and it is not consolidated nor separated from the wound, then you should know that here are small parts where you should cover the plague to prevent it from being touched by chance.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	When dealing with those that are separated and do not separate, those that do not separate and pull the member causing pain, then insert your hand there where you can easily insert it.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you encounter the plague or inflammation, it is a sign of something else, another form of corruption and putrefaction, then cover that with what is convenient for you to use in the care of that which precedes the following account in the upper part of the book.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from that which covers you, make sure your speech is suitable and present your hand: when it grows large, raise it above the member as if it were the thigh and the helper, and seeming like those of the large members, and do not presume to attract or extract, nor the extraction of it that many swells occur due to this for about 20 or 30 days; and take care of the plague if you see it, and if not, lay it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the care of node that occurs in the dressing of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	When visible motions occur in this node of the surgical treatment of fracture, and especially when it relates to joints, and is observed through the figure of the member; and therefore, it strongly prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	It is considered if the node is recent and administered in those medicines that have stitched aloe, essential oil, and myrrh, and camphor, and semblance of those; and it is not necessary to take from any of them, or all of them, or some of them, according to what you have stitched with aloe, essential oil, or album of honey, or agreeable oil, and then place those over the node in stopping, and bind those over it for good constraint.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And the excision that does not cut through that per day; and if it does cut through that, then do so again, until it is re-flattened; or stretch over that lamina of plomo descentment, four plomo has property of remaining totally that which is inflamed in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the node has already been converted into stone and is being stretched and it causes the star of that coitament, then cut through that per the part of the pus raised of it, and insert the superfluity and eminent, or ratz that member rezoris if it is re-flattened; and cure that within if it is healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in Latin, It
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When restoring a fracture, if it is restored and follows the natural direction of the bone, it is properly called a "restoration" by doctors.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and if the subtle member and limb are moved slightly, then nothing is achieved except by causes that are not: of which one is a multitude of solutions for the limb and the ligamentation of the pain does not follow that it covers; or by superfluity of stricture of the ligaments within which nutrients are prohibited from reaching the member; or by superfluity of embrocation; or by movement that is excessive at its time; or by lack of sanctification in the body of the patient and debauchery of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure for this is to give massage to the patient and make them breathe deeply, and enter a warm bath and wet their clothes and let them dry over the patient.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then return the bandage to the member, so that the bandage attracts the necessary nutrients, or continue embrocation of the wet water, within which the nutrient flows and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the cure of the three-knuckle bones when they are restored incorrectly and it is forbidden to operate on them, as it covers.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member that has been restored is under the care of the sanatorium for its tortuosity and eminence at the third metatarsal and nodality, and it is formed in the form of the member, but the member is not prohibited from the natural operation of the foot, it does not cover that you receive the word of that which exists in that member is a new tritone.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Many have already performed these operations on many patients, and this operation is often feared by those who perform it, as the one who performs it is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodulation are recent, it is likely that they are caused by water in the one who has them, as the ones who have them are swollen like the feet of those who have had an operation on the legs, and resemble those; and it should be applied to the member a plaster that is made of mollification, as if it were painted with oil or ointment, and it should be placed on the member; or if it is grease from the feet and it is mixed with wool or gray or olive oil, and it is applied to the member; or if they are greasy figs and they are tied with the fingers of the hand, and they resemble those of the medicines that are used for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	When some women are dissolved by frequent rubbing of the drier that is on the most humid parts, and it is administered to the member in all parts during all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the tortuosity has already been anointed and becomes hard and converted into stone and necessity arises for surgery of the patient's leg, then you should cover that the pus is below the cecum and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and it should be known that this is superfluous nodation of those metals in the bones that have been incised subtly, and there should be facilitated care in that part of the patient's solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol, Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the speech on displacement.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is a separation of one of the joints of the upper limb, which prohibits movement and forces the figure of the member to be over the thigh, causing great pain and injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When you encounter an accident of dislocation, you should perforate as much as possible to reduce it, and do not delay in reducing it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes necrotic and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And you should not cover it with anything but in the moment of the aspiration, for motas that are visible bring on spasms and painful sensations.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, you should know that you are performing the labiotomy on the thigh, and then place your finger inside where the incision was made; and then the member should be embrocated with warm ointment and ointment, and then it should be reduced for ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	When each member is treated with care, the reminder will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	When I have already ordered the capsules of dislocation according to what precedes in fracture, from the beginning of the swollen part it goes to the end of the swollen part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the jaws are not tightened, and the dislocation of the teeth is caused by two causes: either they are loose in their sockets due to little removal, and are then softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and compressed, entering that they are softened at the joint between the foot and the tongue, which does not hold its mouth and does not clench its tongue, and the tongue is wrapped in the gullet.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of the jaw is slight, it usually returns to its original position for no reason.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation is complete and compressed, you should make sure that the reduction of the jaw is given as soon as possible, and it should not be delayed for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	This line translates to: "And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and enters the doctor's hand into the mouth of the patient, either in the jaw where the dislocation of the mandible is located, if it is in one part; or if the doctor enters both hands into the mouth, if the dislocation is in multiple parts, and the others say that the jaw is deformed from those that engage; and commands the patient to stop using their jaws and release those from each part; and the doctor removes the jaw and cleans the jaw before returning it to its original location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce the joint, and especially if the mandibles are dislocated, you should administer eyewash with water and oil, and if the reduction of the mandibles is painful, do not delay the reduction of the other joints, as they have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and close the patient's mouth and do not bite it, you should place your hands over those powders of drap, and use wax and rose-colored oil; and you will find that it is easier to pull out the teeth.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And if the patient's head is on the table, and his chin is between two handles, so that he does not bite his lips at the end or on the left; and you do not force any cause; if the table is a leopard's skin, then when the pain becomes more intense and the mandibles are notched, you should push it with your hand.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And it will be administered easily, and you should not work on the swelling of the mouth, but rather on the food and bile and excretion, if the mandible is notched and healthy.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not converted to their proper places, then one should make frequent observations of the fevers and daily showers, and the stomach of the patient will often become irritated, and the patient will often vomit bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you see this, you will know that it is lost; and observations made daily will show you the one to which this happened in X days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder girdle and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder girdle is not dislocated from the latissimus dorsi by its continuity to the chest; and some are dislocated at their proper place, and that is declared by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of the patient is that he lies on his side with his knees extended and his feet touching the ground.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And make sure to cover the area with your palm with strong pressure, so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place your hand over the plaster and powder and press hard on that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	When the end of that which is inserted into the thigh is not continuous, it should not be dislocated on any day; you should reduce and grip it according to what has been said and what you have appeared to understand.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over that plaster, powder, and extraction, and command the patient to adhere to the tightness and the reparation within which it is cured.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And when this curative measure is reduced, the end of the muscle is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the displacement of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated except for three ways, of which one is dislocated from the beginning of the tibia to the end.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the muscle, and it is made hard; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the bottom parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most dislocated and deformed and is pushed to the end parts of the tibia, and most in those where the bones are few, it is dislocated; less in those where the bones are many, it is pushed out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	When many people experience pain in the body due to hitting or pressing, and the muscles of the body become inflamed due to cauterization, it is already known that this has occurred.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	When you arrive at the patient's side, you should enter quickly and proceed with the treatment of the patient.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It is known when the dislocation occurs when you feel the pain in the joints; therefore, you must distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the surrounding muscles, and then between the different manifestations of the dislocated muscle; and you should touch the head of the concave muscle and the surrounding muscles, and in the thigh, it cannot be reduced to the knee joint, nor can it be maintained for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the dislocation is painful, you must apply pressure to the joint and touch the muscles with your hand, and do not be afraid.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is reduced slightly when it is fresh and the thigh is relaxed.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of the dislocation is that the master lifts the leg of the patient to the sides; and he places his hand on the titillated part of the joint, and he raises the joint with strength in its new location, and the master lifts the leg of the patient, and extends it there; and he pauses it so that it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If the pain does not return after a certain period of time and it is due to dislocation, then days should pass, and the leg should be covered with a damp cloth and massaged with oils that are mollifying and linimentic such as rose oil, fenugreek, and millet, and the pain should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And if the thigh is flexed on the patient's shoulder and is held in place by the expectation of wool that is between tightness and stricture, and if the doctor places the thigh on the table and raises the head of the muscle that is vertuous, and pulls the pain of the thigh towards the points that are outside, and another servant holds the head of the thigh, so that it is not uncomfortable for the points that are outside, then until that returns to its original position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce that second maneuver: and it is that you are making present a man who has a long leg, and is from the side of that thigh, and enters the shoulder muscle into the expectation of the thigh and raises the expectation of the thigh to the parts outside as soon as the thigh is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the pain of the thigh away from the points outside of the abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	When the patient's thigh is injured, you should cover it with something that is lighter than another cause, so that it does not cause more pain, and the dislocation returns as much as possible.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	When the joint is reduced by another hand: and it remains in the ground a long rod of the head of which is of human figure, like a pillow of mortar, which is not thick nor subtle, and is placed next to the thigh; push that the reduction is over the head of the rod, and the thigh is standing second according to the length of the rod, and extend the hand of you to the parts on the other side; and extend the body of you from the other part for strength, that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If the reduction is difficult due to all the causes that have been said, use this treatment: and it is that you hold a rod of the quantity that is in the long of two bars, and the latitude of which is four degrees, and the largest part of it is released in the preon of the tittilic according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place a pillow of rods on the head that the rod does not press the thigh.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place the reduction next to the thigh and extend the hand or arm over the rod into the parts on the other side, and see the rod over the assistant and the hand and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then, place your arm on a scale according to the latitude, and the other end should be extended to the parts behind, and the other part should be suspended from the other side, so that the joint does not move too much.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the joint is complete according to your ability, and you notice that you have pauses on the opposite side of the titillate spur of wool; and then apply a plaster made of powder of honey and almond oil over all the muscle, so that it does not roll back, and strengthen the titillate with stricture decent; and the limb is rolled over the plaster, and the part of you is connected to the collar of you, and it is less, and not bad for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And if the food of the patient is little, then enter that member is comfortable, so that you can push it to the sanctuary of you.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if the food is given more in seven or eight days, or if it is exercised with a movement; and then if it stops and does not soften, you are already cured.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated and moves unsteadily due to moisture that occurs in it or another cause, then you should know that three points are needed to be administered with cauterization, as it is said in the capital of cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If everything is done and it takes about three days for the joint to loosen and not tighten, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over some parts, and it cannot be raised to the part that is tightened, then you should know that those nerves of the patient, which are at the top of the muscle, have already been cut or extended or made smooth, and you should know that the joint will not stay in its place for long.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of that which is caused, you need the chest and breast or the parts behind it, and the reduction is made by pulling and extending it as much as possible, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if another stricture is administered in that place and cures it within the time it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if gravity occurs in the member and slowness in the movement of it, then you should use the thighs and legs when that gravity is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	I apologize, but I am unable to provide a translation for "Capitol
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	This line seems to be in Latin and can be translated as "Treatment of hip dislocation." In medieval medical texts, "cur
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	This line seems to be in Latin and can be translated as "You should know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and when it is dislocated in all parts, and especially in the front and rear parts, and the dislocation of the hip is not affected by your effort or your touch after the time or the touch of any figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip joint, it is clearly declared to you that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch that muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	When you see the joints dislocated, and the dislocation is approaching the postmortem cauterization point, if you see the postmortem cauterization point, it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, and it is hardly ever cured for all; and especially when you reach the rear parts, the bad effect is on all other types of dislocation, and with more pain, and visible movements that seem to want to end in death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of the joint is when it can be reduced, and if it is possible to extend the flesh of the patient more, and expand the thigh, and the doctors are over the patient's chest and behind him, and they press the joint with their elbows on the bones of their fingers or the palm of their hand that turns in its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the rear parts, you must return as soon as possible, and double the flesh of the patient with his own skin, within which the hand presses the palm of the other hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not comply with reduction, you must apply strong extension and great force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	When two assistants extend the arms, and hold that painful area with two assistants so that it is not uncomfortable due to extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then, if you rotate the arms completely, please note that they are wrapped in a long, doubled cloth over the body of the patient, or around.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the physician touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to that part for the reasons that help in lubrication of the joint and ease; and then press the joint with a strong push as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of the cover that is placed over that bandage where it is sterilized and exfoliated with albuminous juice, and is extended over the stricture descent, and the arm is hung from the collarbone, and is left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then slide it; and therefore, if the joint is formed in the desired location, you can slide the cloth of that arm and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see that the joint is not tightening, you can repeat the ointment and the cloth of that arm, and leave it for several days until it is extended; and then slide it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If an injury occurs to the joint, and its position is in movement, you should apply hydration in baths and gentle friction, and compression, when it is separated; or place over the dislocated joint, so it is a fatty thigh; and apply thereon, and lay it over the bone of the day and the nail.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And if you take that off, and put it in a bath; and when it dries, you should gently rub the joint with your hand, and repeat over the dislocated one, so it is in movement, one turn, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	and when it is wet, enter if it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place over the wet, slick cow's hide on the border and press it on that; and make some more turns, wet that and reduce to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is about the joint between the arm and the chest.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When someone has dislocated their shoulder or arm, and the reduction of the dislocation is not smooth, and it is different from other joints, but rather slow in reducing it at the time of displacement, because the location is tense or if it occurs in a tense area, then cauterization may be necessary.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	Then, place the joint of the thigh over a table and extend the leg, and press the thumb or palm against the joint, and push it back into its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider whether the palm has already been placed on the abdomen of the thigh, and if the reduction is necessary, then place the two hands of the patient on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes the reduction, then the position of the hand of the patient should be placed on the abdomen of that joint intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor covers the area of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if you return it to its place, well; and if not, then press the joint firmly and release the tendon, and do not do this again, as otherwise, you will not be able to reduce it in the days that follow.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. For the intestine or hernia should be returned to its cavity, and your hand should be placed over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the intestine or hernia is returned to its cavity, place your hand over it and hold it there for several days; then slowly and gently exercise the muscles of the area.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of the area is not stopped and causes pain or discomfort, then apply cold compresses to the affected area and massage gently with your fingers.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitulum .xxix.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of dislocation of the joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some joints are dislocated in their entirety.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	When someone is dislocated from one of the fingers or the abdomen of the patient, then you hold the finger and push it back into its place, as soon as it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the top of the finger, suspend the finger from that part where it was dislocated, and let it hang for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend the finger and extend it as soon as the swelling decreases in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When the pain subsides, follow that second part of this narrative and do not delay sliding it in the day and exercising its movement, and follow that in the night; and continue for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it appear as if this is the case, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient and you hold it at that part and perform the first operation on the second day, when it becomes healthy.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it appear as if this is the case when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an injury occurs to one of the vertebrae or the lower back, and there are many other vertebrae in that same area that are not affected, it is not cured by simply treating those nearby, for death will soon arrive at the buttocks.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And it is clear that the suffering of the buttocks is outside one's will and cannot be held back; and if the patient's limbs are very painful, or their thighs or chest, or one of those; or a spine is needed at that location, where the pain is felt and removed from four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And that has already been adjusted to the rear parts and is not causing any discomfort.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure of the patient is that you consider if the dislocation is due to weakness, where the other part is not affected and is not cured nor can be healed by that part alone.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that case, if it is due to pain or pressure or appearance at those parts, the ancients had many ways of curing, of which the least effective was the one that caused more harm than good, due to its proximity to the exposed part, which I have already explained and formatted from different instruments of that, which I showed you and spread it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	When it is not cured by any of those, but only by that which I recommend to you, then it is truly gout.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	If the thigh is extended over the face, covering the eye almost completely, and is extended further down the body, then it is truly gout.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And if a hard point is placed, it should be placed on the ground at the end of the thigh around the head of the patient, and another point should be placed on the other end of the thigh.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The physician should hold the point, and not be stopped in the pit; and another physician should hold it in the same manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the head of the thigh and tighten the tail; and extend the end of the tail to the point where the head of the patient is, and fasten it there; and adjust all the ties and the ones on the other end to the tail of the foot.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the physician should extend the tie to the point of the point, and do not be tightened the two ties and the ties of their parts in which they are placed, but rather not stop until they have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	When the doctor places their hands on the spine for strength as they return, or if they place them on one table, and adjust the weight on the table as they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, you must take a table where the latitude or longitude is at the center of three bricks, and dig into the wall of the one where they said that the evacuation was located in the middle of the extremities of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then stop the table on the spine, and the doctor places their hands on the other end, and starts as soon as the spine is straight and returns to the original location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the one that is turning around the spine as the evacuation; and it is that you must fix yourself on the ground with the cap of the evacuation at the end of the plug two fists, the longitude of which is a bracelet, and you must have the cap in the end of the plug most excellent two fists; and the longitude that is between each fist and it is turned, and each one must be fixed on the ground so that it is not damaged.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When a bone is broken, it should be set in the right position and then rotated in the two directions of the two splints.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the end of the foot, there is a point in which a nail is formed, whose length is such that it can be turned; and in the other two points, it seems similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the strings that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the point that you must cut off the head of the foot, and the strings that you have tied in the thighs in the turn that you must cut off the feet of the patient.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And you must cut off each turn and leave a master who turns the turn in its place, and the needle sews the spine according to what they have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then push the spine back, and the place is engulfed, you have to cover with a paste that is not too thick, and then stop; and then cover over the pasted table of which the latitude is three or five times as much as the distance that takes the place of the yellowish part, and over the end of the spine sa.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And you should see if the string is according to what they have said, and use the healthy thigh as nutrition subtle within which it is.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If at any point during the treatment, you find that the patient's condition worsens and the medications prescribed by the doctor are not working effectively or within a long period of time, which have been recommended; and the treatment has been administered in that location, then the thin layer of plaster should be removed.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	If any signs of impending danger appear at the end of the spines of the back, and it is caused by that displacement; and if that part has already suffered from what was not considered dangerous for this medicine, because it is very difficult for you to correct this mistake.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not always cause displacement, but only in certain cases, and they do not happen to those that happen to the other small removals and concavitations.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And when the joint of the ankle is dislocated, it happens in four ways: either by the fingers, or by the toes, or by the heel, or by the back.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The dislocation of the joint is clear when you adjust the thigh bone according to the healthy thigh, it becomes long and bent that from the healthy one, and the thigh cannot fold the knee that you must lengthen, and it is the place where you must lengthen the knee joint using a cautery, because the top of the thigh has already come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The indication for this is that the accidents of the thigh are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The indication for this is that the accidents of the thigh are opposite to this accident. If it expands the knee joint according to another complement, but does not bend the knee that is in the denial, and if it goes forward and cannot be over there; and the urine of the patient is retained and the erection of the penis is cautery, and you must place the leg on the talus.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	When you see that the leg has suffered a dislocation in the rear parts because it does not expand the nail, nor can it bend the nail that doubles around it, and the camba of the thigh is shorter than the other, and the nail is softened, and the top of the thigh is at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of the species in this dislocation is that you consider, doctor, if the dislocation is old and antiquated, that it has already been anticipated by those who had that dislocation, and you administer reduction to it according to its own disposition, and you do not cover whether it is fit for that; and then it is not considered a sumptuous fayta.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the one in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, you consider that it comes to you because the joint has been extended and it has been expanded to the rear parts and to the front parts, and on the right and left, and fort he returns and does not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this maneuver, you consider that you have prepared a strong minister and extended the camba of the thigh from where it was previously placed, or from the hands, or from what is being held over the nail; and another minister extends the part of that below so that the hands are further away from the thighs of the patient; and you stretch the leon over the rasor of the thigh, and hold another minister at the extremity of the leon.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	If the extension of the patient or the part where the pain begins is from the shoulder to the acromion, or from the back to the elbow.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	If the extension of all those parts is in a straight line within that space, and if the body is raised high above the ground and hangs downward.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is unique to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns as said, then so be it; otherwise, you must use this type of extension for all cases of that cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts of the shoulder, then make sure that the body is hanging down over the top of the head; and place the limbs on the side of the foot in that location where the head of the foot meets the place where the elbow is; and extend the limb from the acromion to the last part of the shoulder.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister firmly grasps the thighs and makes the large cavity of the patient's thigh larger by extending the parts that are out of place, in order to return it to its original location.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This is a special case of care in which this member is reduced that the other cases are not.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you excuse me and do not obey the entry of this special case of care for the entire body, you will notice that the two feet of the patient are tied together with strong, firm threads, on both sides of the ankles and on both sides of the heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each of his parts is proportional to the number of four, and the thigh is extended more than the other by two inches.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And the thigh is suspended over the head of the foot, and it is in the most; and the length of it from the earth is the amount of two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a young man to cut off the head of the thigh, and suspend it on another young man's thigh, and the other young man pulls the thigh back with strong force, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	If you reduce the part itself, when there is a dislocation at the end of the joint, notice that the thigh jags over the plug according to what has been recommended in the gelbozitat; and hold the cord tightly on the thigh proper and on the chest of the patient.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	When the two fists are placed, one on the foot of the patient and the other on the head; and when they are adjusted, they should be placed on the back of the pillow that is covered with cloths containing cold humors, so that the thighs do not become chilled by the fist being between the thighs, because the extension to the parts beyond that will cause inflammation.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And if every physician extends to his part, and he places his hand over it, and then makes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If you follow the reduction, do it very carefully; and if not, stop over there diligently and ask what they have said in regard to that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	I do not think that the patient will lie down comfortably on those beds.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the parts beyond, you should cover the camba with a thin cloth, and follow this method on the pillow; and the physician should place the palm of his hand over the patient's shoulder, and the other hand on the opposite shoulder, and then stop that extension at the part where the dislocation was.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is to the rear parts, you will not cover that the thigh is extended to the rear parts and is raised above the ground; if there are any hard places to be placed over, it depends on whether the ankle of the patient is dislocated to the rear parts, as has been said about the swelling of the knee over two ankles; and if the face and limbs are extended, as has been said, it has not harmed.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	If there is an administered compression on the table over the place where the joint is to be made.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then when the reduction is completed, according to which you cover — and the sign of the reduction is not troubled by you, and it is that you extend from the thigh to the leg, and when you see those angles and the thigh extends the angle camba and expands at that session's excuse, you know that the member follows — and then you adjust the thighs and pause the cushion and extend the bandage so that the thigh is not hurt in any of the parts; and adhere the thigh to the wounds for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	When cutting the limb and the bandage, compare one with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those teeth in your mouth, you know that the displacement is already firm, and then you can remove the splint.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of softening, then return and apply that, and stretch it again the next day, and keep it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And cut that, and make it lie in the ambulance for several days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the nose.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The nose is dislocated in three parts, four on the front, and four on the inside, and none on the back; and the nostrils are not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of the nose is that you command your thigh to apply your bandage to the cushion; you know that the nose is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the parts of the nose is that you make your thigh stretch the cushion as much as possible, if it can be placed over there; adhere the two ends to the face of the patient, and place the tip between the thumbs; and make the tip of the nose adhere to your palms, and extend those between the fingers of the nose on the tip of the nose, and other ministers extend the cushion as much as possible until the tip of the nose returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When it comes to the matter of relieving the patient's pain, it is said that their ribcage clings to the thigh due to the lack of labor.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply that and hold the ribcage to the thigh, and apply those plasters for three days or four, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the gallbladder's ulceration for more than three days, until it is cured and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the patient's pain is excused, then administer fort extensive care to the ligaments that were involved in the previous cure.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some ankles are slightly dislocated by small removal, and some are dislocated secondarily, and the dislocation of the ankle is made or at the joints of the fingers or at the joints of the toes.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the saying of the dislocation of the ankle is that sometimes the ankle becomes flattened at the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	When the treatment of the removal of the tooth is of slight importance, and it is that it is extended as much as possible and it is returned as soon as possible.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When in the treatment of the dislocation of the joint, covering that you do not touch the thighs, and hold them firmly with a strong hand on the side opposite to the one from which the joint comes out.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if you have your hand at the ankle of the spleen that has been removed, and your left hand at the part of the spleen that is in front of the foot in the cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And if you pull the foot with your hand at your left, and hold your right hand with two fingers, and extend your right hand; and press the chest of the foot with the thumb of the left hand on the part opposite to the one from which the joint came out.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make points according to what has been counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And press the chest of the foot with the thumb on the last point made, and you are in the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if you return in one point or two according to this manual, and if the foot is engulfed, it is bad; and otherwise, continue with the operation, until that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is forbidden to you to reduce the affected part that they have recommended, then make a juster on the patient's back over the ground, and make a small hole in the ground firmly, and place it between the patient's thighs, and you have already covered over the patient with the cloth so as not to expose the back.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And if the master of the foot holds the thighs, and another master extends the point on the foot of the patient's hands or the member that lies over the knee; and extends that each master against the extension of the thigh so that the hole is between the thighs of the patient retained by that, so that this part does not come out of the parts that you have extended.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And if the surgeon engages the dislocation in the thighs, and another master holds the thigh safe in the parts outside, so that the dislocation returns to the ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction of the patient is declared to you, then stop plastering and extend that forcefully, and tie the member to the chest.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	When you fear or guard against the nerves that are behind the sole of your foot, because the tendon over there is not strong and thin.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then apply it for two or three days; and if the tendon becomes softened, remove that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then remove it on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If you have passed the distance without pain, there is no certainty that the dislocation is not over the loosened and corrupted part, and therefore it does not receive care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you fall into this trap, be careful that you apply the cure in the diarrhea of the water we mentioned in our story, in another place of care and decoction, as soon as it is possible.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 324.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Make sure that the one who is dislocated has few extension of his work; and that it is not difficult, advance a little.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the toes of the foot, then cover the ankle with a cloth and place the foot on a flat surface or a table, and hold it steady as if you are about to walk.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And if you are standing, and place the other foot on it to relieve the joint pain, and then gently push the foot back towards its original position, and see that it does not return to its original position and does not disappear in the eminence location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And if you place the belly of the foot of the patient on a table that grips the entire foot, with two caps, and hold it stretched for three days; and then remove it and make it tight again after a few days, until it is stretched and secured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitulum XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the special dislocations that are caused by gout, fracture, or any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When one of those causes occurs and you are in the treatment of that and its restoration, many visible successes follow.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	For this, it is not presumed that the cure of the patient depends solely on the art, but rather on long experience, mercy, and compassion, and later, neither arrogance nor presumption; and it should be used at the beginning of medicines that only offer apostemas, and leave the malady to the divine judgment, not to that of which one hopes for salvation from loss, or for the alleviation of the malady, and in which there is any hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	When you begin to make the reduction of the patient at the beginning of the cause, it is necessary to use cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the member returns later than we want, administer the medicine that contains cautery and cures the wound according to what is suitable for the patient of the dry wounds.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is mistaken for fracture and occurs in the separated bones of the lower extremities, you must perforate the statement of those bones, and make it known that it has been said in the simple diseases of that which is preceded in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And keep and avoid after your virtue that of the intrament in the ways of fear according to what precedes your preaching; fourth, it is better for you to owe the true Creator, and less permanent for your glory, and less salutations to the one who sees those in his time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	This is the end of the paragraphs of Albucasim perfectly of the words by which God is not benefited.
Amen.	Amen.
