Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The first source sentence translates to: "However, the operation is performed in our region and at our time with total privacy, as soon as I deemed it necessary for the science of the art, and the sight of it was left; and I did not want to write about it except for some small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which I destroyed because they were errors and I wanted to extend my understanding of the art and its force.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	It is seen by me that you live in this order of this treatise on the second way of exposure and declaration, and because of which the forms of the tools of cauteries and of the other instruments of the work, as well as for their preparation, are necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The reason why the artisan is not able to make this work in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and that the actor does not know how to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which knows the advantages of the members and their forms, as well as the connection and separation of them; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and tendons, and their number, and their kind; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the locus of the edema of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; however, what is not clear about this is that we do not know if it is correct regarding anatomy, as many people have died because of this science and it is mistaken for another.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You saw a doctor and the patient had an abscess in the thigh, and he incised several arteries in the thigh so that a large amount of pus flowed out when the patient died between the legs of the man.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	You saw another doctor who believed that the woman had a stone in her bladder that had been processed in her state, and the stone was large, and it came out of the woman's body through the urethra, so that the woman died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	You have already called for help and saw that the large size of the stone and the position of the thigh under the woman made her die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	When a doctor from our land took the stipend of a duke for performing surgery and went to a blacksmith who was known for his expertise in treating fractures in the thigh; and the doctor, being ignorant, cleaned the fracture, over the plague, with punches and needles, and reinforced the strong structure, and did not leave any traces on the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	The incision was made according to the patient's will, and the relief, and the dressing was changed every few days and commanded that we uncover the limb; and it is said that the thigh and foot were affected, and it was found to be lost.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you called upon him and appeared to make the incision, and after a while, peace was established and the patient no longer felt any pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was already confirmed in the member, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption spread throughout the thigh as long as the wound was open.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	I saw another doctor who performed a cauterization on the wound and caused it to ulcerate every few days, until the malice of the lord of the land was revealed.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this pain is the twisted bone caused by melancholic humor, which does not cover that it has come to your iron of all, but rather that it is a member of the one suffering that of all has been harmed.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For this reason, children, it is necessary for you to have the operation divided into two parts: one part is for the operation associated with health, and the other part is for the one that endangers the larger possessions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already existed here in every part of this free in which the operation was made where error and fear occurred; for what is necessary for you to guard this and lay it aside, so that the people do not fall into speaking and with you being unjust.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And then secure your weapons with care and protection from God, and your wounds with difficulty and closure.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God to be healthy and praised succession, and lay aside the terrible wounds of difficult cure, and guard your weapons with that which you fear, so that you are not deceived by your faith and your name: four more remain in your glory, and push on in the world and further in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gallantly has already been said in some of my sermons:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	When you do not treat a wound with a proper medicine, because the bad parts do not sit down.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	You have already had to read this text three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the text, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the inside of the foot, in the forms of the instruments and of the cauteries' furnaces, and as is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of dryness and perforation, and of winds, and of plagues, and of extraction of sages and similar things, all chapter ordered in the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and displacement, and of cure of twisting and similar things; chapter ordered from the inside of the foot, and in the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauteries made with fire and sharp medicinal herbs, and reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	When that begins the treatise of all liberty.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I ask you to question the quality of the cauteries and the nocuums of that, and in what collection it is forbidden to use cauteries.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of cauteries and nocuums is long and prolix, subtle by knowledge, secret, and yet understood by few, and those who speak it are in disagreement, and for me a little of their words is enough to fear tedium.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauteries comfort all the whole collection universally, except for two collections, which are those of its matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and cold collection of matter, it will dehydrate; four others said that cauteries are useful for that, and the others said the opposite, that cauteries are not convenient in drunkenness, which is due to its quality and dryness, and nature of the fire is also quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that drunkard and dry matter is caut and sec is sane.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	When you say that it is not good for the whole tail of the cow's anus to be cauterized, but rather for the entire anus and dry skin that appears in the chest of men, when you compare the chest of a man and his humidity with the entire focus, it harms the chest of a man.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	When speaking of this, I have already experienced it in my own life on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not know what kind of expertise one would have to apply this knowledge, or the diversity of the human body and its dispositions, the causes of those diseases, their accidents, and the passage of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other complexions, it is not about your fear, and particularly in wet and gross diseases, where all doctors are agreed on this, and there is no disagreement in the practice of cauterization in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	However, wise sons, you know that the secret of healing by cauterization is fire and the goodness of the wound, which is why cauterization is considered a part of medicine, and the focus is simple, the adjustment of which does not reach the other member except for the one being cauterized and not the other member.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	However, the adjustment of burning medicine does not reach the member that is being cauterized, and more comes to the member with difficult cure and more hears it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	When the fire is too hot, due to its sublimity and good substance, it does not cause pain unless it is excessive. And we have known this by experience and through the length of service in the study of the art of truth; and for this reason you are excused from the length of this sermon and if not, it would not be relevant to your free time in this pause with your secret desire for the fire, and the quality of the operation of the focus in the heart and the expulsion of the waste through which the wastes are expelled, the philosophical sermon is demonstrated, which sharpens in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordion del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I believe the text is discussing the use of cauterization in medicine during the medieval period. Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	When there is no pain in your feet, or rather, as children say, not even the common people and the old doctors think it is cured by cauterization, and they wait for the consequences, then...
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not clear to them as to what they are treating with, for cauterization is not a substitute for medicine, which alters the complexion and dries out the moisture that causes the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, cauterization is often used over medicine due to its excellent value and the good reputation of its operation and the great lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the disease may return at some time, according to the complexity of the disease and its location in the body, as well as the good reputation of the doctor, and that it is prepared in the body of the patient by the addition of superfluities in the body, and that it reaches the patient through his acquisition of similar causes; but if the disease that is administered cauterization is a subtle disease in a few parts of the member and moisture, then as cauterization for toothache and similar things, it is possible that in this case it does not return to that pain, more so if it is done in small doses.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	This appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The text discusses various medical procedures and their meanings. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is in contrast to this; and the understanding that cauterization is not but the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the bandages of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not conform, and rather in the end of the cause they maintain man cauterization, and profit therein.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The first line of the text translates to: "They removed the old points that were made with cautery, and did not remove them unless they were equal in quality to the cautery itself.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	When the location for cauterization is not painful, as it is not absolutely true, but you have already attempted and failed to make that point in another part of the body, and cauterization is better than cutting with iron that was previously used; however, when you perform cauterization, it is not declared to you that the gold content varies according to the amount you want for the hardness of the gold, and you prepare the reception of the flesh; and if you adjust over the ignition point, the gold will be in the fire, and there may be some layers for the craftsman to occupy that part.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore, for this reason, it is necessary to use the iron lightly and carefully in the direction of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And you have already ordered this capital in cauterization according to the capitals, and ordered those of the foot within the feet, so that the requester can choose that one from you.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cauterization for head pain due to coldness and wetness.
Le capitol primier.	The first capital.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers humidity and coldness on the accident of which you cause harm, causing soda and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the hoofs and nails, and numerous sleeping, and toothache and gout, and universally of all maladies that appear due to coldness, which are paralyzed, sore and apoplexy, and seem similar in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this, which initially commands the thigh that it be evacuated by civil medicine the cap of the foot, three or four times, according to what is asked by the virtue of the thigh and the age of the person and their custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And it commands that you shave the part where the pain is, and place your hands on the patient's shoulders over a low table and hold their hands on the painful part.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And place your thumb on the razor blade and press it against the razor's edge between the nails of your fingers.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, as the said place has been mentioned, mark that location with your finger, and pay attention to the olive oil cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And place it over the location you have marked, with your hand that descends, with which the second thumb is slightly tightened little by little, and you will rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see any part of the bone emerging from it in any amount, then do as much as the amount of errors, raise your hand again, and if not turn the other, if it is cold, enter that as soon as you see the bone that I have told you to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	When you have taken a small piece of salt and dissolved it over the area and rubbed it in three times, it is called a "salted wound." This is a traditional medical term used to describe a wound that has been treated with salt to prevent infection. The salt is believed to have antib
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then, pause over the border that is exposed in the edge and rub it on the inside where the focus scar is destroyed. This is a traditional medical term used to describe the process of applying a salve or ointment to a wound to promote healing and prevent infection. The term "salved" refers to the act of making something better or improving its condition.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then, cure the area with an antiseptic such as alcohol or vinegar if it is healthy. This is a traditional medical term used to describe the process of treating a wound with an antiseptic to prevent in
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	Then, it is known that when the Roman plague opens the throat, then half of the mouth gets the breathing tube, which is better and more useful. This is a traditional medical term used to describe the process of inserting a breathing tube into the throat to help a patient breathe when they are unable to do so on their own. The term "int
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	Then, it is known that when the doctors cauterize the nail within the ear and hold it with the cautery within the ear, then it is held in place until the part of the ear that is affected is healed. This is a traditional medical term used to describe the process of using a cautery to cauterize a nail within the ear to prevent it from being removed by the patient or to promote healing if it has become infected. The term "cauterized" refers to the act of burning
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	It is customary for others to use a pointed cautery when it comes into contact with the skin, as soon as it presses on the strong bone within and as soon as the bone begins to crackle, and this is the method of making small alphecati:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	It is believed that the vapors from the head will escape from that place:
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If the wound is kept clean for a long time and it is cured when it is solidified:
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these specific kinds of cauteries before, only in the fearful cases of some men; and if you lay that aside, it is better for your health when it is; that the head is connected by a solution of continuity of the flesh as has been testified in other members, and most especially when the head of the thigh is in its natural state.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cauterization is not as safe and better for your health; and from that you will see and it will be good for your health.
Capitol segon.	The given text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written
Del cauteri del cap.	in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the whole head, and it is prolonged in the chest, and there are used gerras, cochias, capipurges, emplaustres, guatz, cadels, and wonders, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that does not burn and does not profit from that cause, then consider whether the head of the chest is of great creation in its nature; and do not use large flees, and do not burn much, and use another cauterization on that with a smaller one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the codon and reveal the bone that has been found, and cut the joint on the side of the head in the area called the "V" and place a pointed cautery there, and it is placed in the area where the wind blows.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And then open the abdomen, and do not discover the bone, but the thigh will become greatly painful, different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you direct this cauterization in its place, where it is said that this cauterization is used for the cauterization of the joints of the head and the occiput, and a subtle cauterization is made on that part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Capital term.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of non-antique cauterization of migrants.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When in the head of the cap pain is felt, or a sharp pain enters the wrist, it is necessary to evacuate medicines from the head of the patient, and to administer other care, which you have said in the diseases of the maladies; and all should not profit, if cauterization is made in that way: either with a sharp cauterization from medicine like combustible, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The first line of the source sentence is "Mays cauteri am medicina comburent". This can be translated as "More cauterization is used in medicine than is customary". The second line, "es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh", means "if you take a heated iron". The third line, "e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps",
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	This line can be translated as "And if you press the location of the pain in the temple with a needle that has been inserted into the place where it is located, inside which has been hidden". This seems to be a description of a medical procedure for treating headaches or other types of pain in the temple area.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	This line can be translated as "And apply pressure on it for about three hours; and then remove the plaster and let it dry for two or three days, and then pause over the area that has been immersed in water within the place where it has been sore". This seems to be a description of a medical treatment for treating a sore or injured area of the skin. The use of water and the application of pressure and heat may be part of a traditional or alternative medical practice.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	This line can be translated as "And cure it if it becomes healthy within the time that it is sane". This seems to be a description of a medical treatment for treating an
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	This line can be translated as "And if you see, make use of some medicines that are burning which you have written in the book of burning medicines". This seems to be a recommendation for the reader to consult a book of medical treatises for information on using burning medicines. The use of burning medicines was a common practice in medieval medicine, and the reader is advised to consult a reliable source for more
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May's cauterization is second only to this method: iron for cauterization, of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	This sentence is referring to a type of medical tool called a "clavicle" or "clavicle pin," which is used to hold the head in place. The text states that this tool is shaped like a thorn and is placed in a specific location on the patient's neck, where it provides support and stability.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	This sentence is advising the practitioner to place their hand over the location of the pain and gently push down on it, in order to prevent further damage to the intestine that has been placed there. They should do this slowly and carefully, as the intestine can be easily injured if not handled properly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	This sentence is stating that if a large amount of intestine is forced into the abdominal cavity through the hole in the abdominal wall, it can cause the artery to become injured and lead to bleeding. To prevent this, the practitioner should gently push down on the intestine with their hand, making sure not to injure the artery that has been placed there.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	This sentence is advising the practitioner to apply a poultice made of salt and water to the affected area, and then place the poultice over the location. They should leave the poultice in place for three days, and then remove it carefully, taking care not to cause any further injury. The text also states that the patient should be monitored to ensure that they are healing properly.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you see, make points at the end of the thigh with a pointed cautery, and keep an eye out for the incision of the artery in this truly ancient migration.
Capitol quart.	I'm sorry, I didn't understand that. Could you please provide
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua: This means "of the cauterization of ancient migration." It seems to be
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the ancient migration with this cauterization, and it has been said that the previous treatment was not effective, and sometimes due to the disease that does not suffice for what has been said in the first cauterization of medicine or of the cauterization of focus, then you should cover the cauterized thigh with something that is white, because it means at the location of the pain on the line of longitudinals of the one who is the most affected, or of that; and pause your hand for a moment and stretch it over the incision of the artery and push it into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is harmed by chewing, and that the tail does not become rough and the nerves that cause that, and that it does not become swollen.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the custody and caution of the flow of sinews from the arterial branch that is blocked, then in that place there is fear, and most importantly for that one who does not know what to do and is not studious and does not practice; and stop the operation on that.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come to remember the rule of the flow of sinews in case of an accident of the artery according to the right hand side, in the location of this free one.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you see of this bad case that does not feed this cautery and see the corpse of the bad one tolerateable, cauterize that in the middle location of the head cap as they have encountered, and care for the wound after it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, maintain the cautery that has said in the capital of stretching of the artery with an arterial cautery having two points, and this cauterization is better and less dangerous.
Capitol .v.	Capital.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of the pain of gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the gout there is pain from cold and it is cured by causes that are laxative and by another care that I have said in the division, and it is not relieved by the pain, you ignorant of the cauterization, and this is the one that has the name of point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When a point is made on the nail, and it is directed towards the entire circumference of the toe as it rotates, or in the circuit of each example if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Continue to use the cautery on the toe's sole, as many pus as necessary to reach the spot intended.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery points on the entire toe, and that is sufficient, and properly cares for the holes inside that are healthy.
Capitol .vi.	End of Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization of warts.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Warts that are cured and treated with cauterization are not the same as those that come from fleas, as has been said in the sections of the diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization for spasms or twitches of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that wart with scars, tears, and purification, and do not confirm your cure, you must first cauterize the thigh of the patient, then a small piece of cloth is placed on it to absorb the moisture, and finally the conjunctiva of the two lips is cauterized.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When stopping the cautery for the opposite side of the malady, four types of mollification do not appear in the part that appears to be healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize the part with the cautery at the right end of the swollen nasal pus, and on the other side, the length of which is the same as the length of the first, and then your hand departs from it when the quantity of the affected area of the ribs is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of cauterization, and it is specific to the barber, the form of which is displayed on a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, there are few pus that are not seen; and it is believed that too much luxury causes a few.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And the treatment of the place where the procedure is performed is to heal when it is healthy.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol, Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy occurs and is treated as has been said and does not confuse your medicine and the patient does not have a fever, you cauterize that part four times: on all the corners of the head; and you cauterize and the place of the head, as has been said; and you cauterize in the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	When the hand of the cautery is made according to what is said, it means that the point has been made correctly.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is less painful; and you should apply your cure according to what is appropriate.
Capitol .viii.	The first line of the text is "Capitol .viii." which
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma" translates to "From the cauterization of forgetfulness, it is caused by inflamm
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz" translates to "It is believed that large and powdered pills are given to the thighs at the beginning to make them moisturized.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres" translates to "And then, shave the entire thigh and place the cork on the center described in the chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri" translates to "And then, place some wet cloths on it, and that is the tool for cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit" translates to "And then, follow that order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	E donc si per aquels sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col" translates to "And if those can help, then; otherwise, do three cauterizations on the opposite side of the head, which are from the swollen part of the head to the part below the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	When you pause between each cauterization of the said point, take care that the cauterization is properly done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you add more and the thigh is tolerable, then make the cauterization in that place; and if you see more addition, make the cauterization on both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Take care to enter that part which is healthy; and let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to the form given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in the softening of the head, and according to what has been said; and take out the head of the thigh, and make a cauterization on that place which is the cauterization on the thigh's side, and make cauterizations on all parts of the thigh, and make three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the collarbone.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary to do more softening of the body in too many and the thighs' tolerance and the thigh is strong, then make cauterizations on that part with four cauterizations on the vertebrae of both sides, and sometimes make a cauterization inside where there is pressure from the mot of the leg, and lift up the other leg.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And apply this cure to that part which is healthy and this be olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Capitol, Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the application of cauterization for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized the epileptic except that epilepsy is by flea.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore change the brain of the patient at the beginning of the month and at the end of another treatment that has been given in the division when the womb is large and can bear the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the child who did not tolerate the medicines, administer guardianships and mastiguators and change the servant daily, for this for a few days, for the benefit of the womb.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And cut the head of the womb, and apply cauterization to that part with a cauterization in the previous location of the head, and another cauterization on the occipital part of the head, and over each corner of the head it should be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the womb is strong and can bear, apply cauterization to those which I have mentioned, with parallel and mollification of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	If the cautery is followed by olive oil.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is young, then stop using the sharp cautery immediately after this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Capitulum XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Chapter on the treatment of melancholy by cauterization.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are humid and corrupted and largely flaccid, then cauterize that part with the cauters that have been mentioned in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity and declines into melancholy, and the thighs of the patient are humid, then give him this remedy that cleanses the brain according to what preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And shave the head of the patient, and make a round depression on the top, and place it gently over the crown.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is sixty years old, and he is held tightly throughout the procedure.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and it is worthy of being bound with ancient wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	When you heat that over the fire for a sufficient amount of time, the one who suffers from it feels it when they are in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And you want that one to be in the corner of the head of the patient's neck and let it enter so that it is cold.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And you give a cold to the patient's thigh for a week, or in another way according to the rule of the patient's bowel that comes out if it is healthy; or if you want, you can make small points on the skin according to the least of the rules, but you have to hold the cauterant in an orderly manner: this is a type of cauterization that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And you stop that hair from being wet on the border or in the gray of the scalp.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of gout that descends in the leg.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are declared by the doctors that gout begins in the leg by the means of the pins that I have told you in the division, then you start and give to the patient an ointment on the thigh that moistens the head of the patient, and hold it until all humidity is gone.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command the patient to raise their head and cauterize that point with the pointed cautery in the middle of the forehead; and cauterize that point with two points over two templates if it is the beginning of urine in two wounds, or with one point if it begins in a single wound.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise all the veins and arteries that are left in front of the chest; and these cauteries are in that line on the templates.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep an eye on the flow of the salve when it is cauterized; and if you see the flow of the salve, stay with the point until the physician arrives.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And when you come, I will know which is in extraction from the arteries and the abscess of those and the cauterization of the flow of the salve.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes a point is cauterized in the neck, with two bones on each side of the cauteries produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	This line seems to be discussing an ancient method of treating tears (lacrimas) using cauterization (cauterizac
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and appear through the veins and arteries that are located in the region of the forehead, it is customary to cauterize those parts with a pointed cautery that have been found in the forehead of those who have had a lot of water in their eyes. Then, cauterize in the middle of the forehead and two points in the temples, and two points in the temples, and two points in the temples.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If you need to add something, then make points on the entire length of the thigh bone over the tip of the little toe with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitulum XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	When using cauterization for putrid nasal discharge, it is recommended to use a substance that causes a small amount of infl
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating that condition mentioned in the division and not taking advantage of your medicine, you should present yourself and show to the patient's thighs three times; then cut off the head of it, and cauterize the point with a sharper cauterizing iron than the one used before.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that point with the sharper iron on both sides of the nose, leaving a small part of the hair uncut.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep that fire away from the arch.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the cauterization point.
Capitol .xv.	Capitulum XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization for smoothing the eyelids of the warts.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the wart is smoothed by bad hygiene or moisture, you should cauterize that point with a sharp iron on this cauterizing moon; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 And if you, cauterize that on both sides of the nose, a little on each, and make them long from the edges.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	When the length of each cauterization is according to the amount of pressure.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard with your hand, but according to the amount that the inner part of the eyelid is stretched.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitulum.xv.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the eyelashes are converted into parts of the fingers and hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelashes of the eye are converted into parts of the fingers and hand, cauterization is applied to those areas with two fingers, four cauteries or a combination of both, according to the doctor's prescription.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cauterization is done with fire, order the patient to look at their eyelashes as they are usually seen in the mirror, and if the hand is affected, then you must stretch the fingers of the cauterization with a needle so that it does not hurt when the eyelashes are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	So when the eyelashes are born and engulfed, stop the mirror in the highest place, and place your hand over the eyelids of the cauterization, holding the finger that is according to the figure of a skull, and that is the beginning of the hold of the fingers.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then make a cut through the skin and bladder in the wound or over the belly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then light the cautery of which this is the form of the fire.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize over the figure that you have burned, little by little, in circular movements, until the surface of the cloth that is as tight as a shoe is charred, which appears quite naturally.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And if the safety of the work is that you see the eyelid of the belly being pulled back and the eyes of the patient being lifted, then make the puncture in the belly.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and leave it there for three turns, and place the cut over the wound as soon as it is erected.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if you cure that as soon as it is healthy.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the eyes return to their original state due to any cause and the eyelid is softened, then make another cut over there as it was at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the eyes are in the eyelid now, then make another cut over there as it was at first, with the eyelids raised to the natural location and closed so that the eyes do not pull on the wound.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May's cauterization is medicine that burns this which commands the thigh that hears the eyes that are prolonged and engulfed, and it is usually made in the form of a sheet of paper like the beak of a swan.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	When there is pain in the abdomen caused by live coals and fire, and if you want to reduce it immediately, and mix those causes with water and make it a poultice so that it does not become wet; and expand that poultice over the sheet that is made in the shape of a cat's ear, and place the hazelnut on the other end of the thigh; and place the thigh with the intestine in the album of the hurt part, and the head of the abdomen should be near the top.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And pause the medicine and give it to that little one who is not yet sick, so that the patient feels the taste of the medicine, which is in its form like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that the patient does not like the taste of the medicine, give it to him again and wet that one with the same medicine; then when the taste ceases, take out the medicine with clean water; and consider if the eyelid has been washed with the same medicine as the water is hot or cold, which is the best; and if not, apply the medicine over the place where it has not been washed with the medicine and does not dry out because of your operation and does not contradict the hazelnut.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And keep your hand on the chest until the spasm of the cough is over, and then care for it with something warm or another as soon as it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary for you to do your operation, you must diligently guard your operation that does not fall behind in medicine, and if the eyelid becomes softened and any cause of the hairs falling on it, then you should repeat your treatment over that place where the eyelid is softened, and as soon as it is healed, and then return to it when it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of fumigation of the mirror.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the sizes of men vary according to their size and weight, and therefore your contraction is made according to this.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not mistake the way of the rectum for that which is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of the fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a fistula with gout that has been diagnosed in the divisions of diseases and does not confirm your treatment, then you should cauterize the second point on this manicure: command the patient to place their head in their foot, and hold their head by an attendant between their feet in such a way that it is not awkward or agitated for the head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then stop cutting on the tongue of the gout or on the placenta of the flesh of the intestine.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then recognize the cautery that this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The which is cavity, how it is like a cane or a pen of the volt, from one end to the other where the cauterization is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to be as it attempts.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is cured is better than the second work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if you open the fistula, and then take out the sore and dry that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not opened, then you should open it and remove the wound of the patient.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the cautery over the patient, the one that is not lit, and take a small piece of the cautery from the horse's tail at the end, so that your hand does not burn and the mare does not get upset, and you should stop the cauterization in the gray of the horse's tail and corrupt that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the beginning of the cauterization goes into the bone, then it is; and otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization once or twice, according to your skill; and let that stay for three days, and place your hand over it with a border and surround it with something that dries it out, so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it was not cured in three days, then you should stop the acute, corrosive medicine and place your hand over the bone when it is discovered and is rough, according to what is recommended in the capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another way of cauterizing the fistula: go to the location of the fistula and then open it and place your hand in that small fissure, subtle where the form of the fistula is; and then put in that the quantity of one and a half inches of plough fundut; and take your hand and have good retention, and do not make the mare uncomfortable because the plough fundut does not reach the horse's tail of that; and cover that with your hand over the horse's tail coto enfused in album or water, four plough adhere to the location of the fistula and it becomes healthy.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is cured, as they have said about cauterization and cure, then so be it; and if not, you must administer snuff from the nose and reduce the fistula in the nasal cavity according to its location in their own place.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol, Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	About cauterization of the incision can be done.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Wounds that are seen to open fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures as they have said in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, you must use small cauterization instruments according to this form that is applied:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	 And it is the concavity of the foot according to the subtlety of the coat.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place your hand carefully in those fissures as soon as that cauterization reaches the inside of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it as soon as it is cured.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol, Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	About cauterization of the fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the throat or on the tongue or on the gums there is inflammation and swelling, and it breaks apart, and becomes infected, and a fistula forms, and you treat that and do not overdo it, as much cauterizing as is necessary according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and place the ignited cautery at the opening of the fistula, and insert your hand into the hole that the hot iron pierces through, and if the hot iron reaches the bone on either side of the fistula, and at the end of the fistula, then make a cut or two; and cure that as they have told us of the cure within when it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the abscess is healed and is cured, then so be it; but if not, you must discover the location and burn the corrupted bones according to what comes out of their heads.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterizing teeth and mollifying heels.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the heels are softened by humidity and the teeth are rough, and you treat those with medicines and do not confirm them, then place the thigh on the bed, and heat the cauterizing iron to the desired form, and make sure that you press it firmly against the tooth and enter it a little into the thigh, and let the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	When you lift your hand, and then repeat the cauterization on some points according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And when the patient's mouth opens to drink salt water and holds it for an hour, it may cause the tongue to swell, the tooth that is closed to become firm, the gum to be strengthened, and the moisture to become dry.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the use of cauterization for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if it is caused by wind, or if the remedy does not improve the condition, you should cauterize in two places: either with cow dung, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with cow dung involves taking cow dung and burning it in a pig iron pan, and then cutting and wrapping it around the extremity of the tongue, and pressing it firmly against the painful tooth until it becomes cool.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you have lana or a blade, dip it in the cow dung and place it on the tooth, and place it on the fire that is lit until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization is not effective if you do not pay attention to the part that is inflamed or the sharpness of the focus, and the heat does not reach the mouth of the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And accordingly, the doctor will choose the form of the cauterization and place it on the tooth and touch it with the burning cauterization; and he will make some cuts so that the pain remains or is reduced on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is believed that with the pressure of this cauterization, the patient's mouth will open wide and hold it for an hour and remove the cushion; and this is the form of cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And you should cauterize with what you see as the end of that which you can do.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of extrophulous.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophulous are of fleck and of cold humors and not obeying digestion by medicines and you see the digestion is light, then you should choose the cauterization with the form that follows, having two ends for the smoke, so that you need to light the other end on the apostema, and make a cut there, and another if necessary, and enter when it comes to the apex of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the frostbite is small, stop the cauterization according to the amount of frostbite, and then apply it for three days and remove it from the affected area if it becomes inflamed as much as that which the fire has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And care for that wound and try to dress it as soon as it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The form of the cannula or cautery is such that...
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of rheumatism of the joints and constriction of the neck.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When cold humors infiltrate the trachea of the lung, and more so when it is due to cold, then you should make the patient evacuate the bowel at the beginning of medications with laxatives, and then cauterize that point at the root of the gallbladder in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to arrive at the cauterization of the gallbladder or burning of the neck, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And if you cauterize that point, then you must also cauterize the joint of the collarbone in the corresponding spine of the neck.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of this wound should be made in the same way as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then, after it has been treated as before, it will become healthy again.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitulum .xxiv.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization of the lung and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung inflammation are caused by cold humors and the patient does not have fever or chills and it is an old lung inflammation, then make a cut on the shoulder in the areas where the leaves are loose and the bones are firm; and make another cut in the chest between two mammillas; and let the cauterization be made with a clavilh according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your cauterization can be made with punctures in the cauterization that is called point, the form of which precedes in the pointing of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points on the cartilage around them; and then, after it has been treated as before, it will become healthy again.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cauterization has three ramps for the cauterization, then you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	The text you provided is not in the language of Latin, Italian,
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	From the cauterization of the gout that is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the helper's head is dislocated due to slippery humors and does not remain in place at the time of returning, it must be returned to its dislocation within which it was previously used, and with a slight movement, it is displaced as if it were being pulled back, as we have witnessed, reducing the dislocation first, and then the thigh is placed over the knee or over the table; and then the chest is raised that is in the part of the cilylt to which the parts of the hand are attached, if the joint is dislocated in the parts of the thumb, then it is dislocated in the parts of the little finger.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And do not use the cautery with two points; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And insert the cautery between the chest and the other thigh; and you will see the figure of the cauterization with four points.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And those subtleties follow the quantity of attempts; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some adjustments are made according to this count and by those cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And place yourself over the cauterization point with your hand, and place the intestine in its proper position, and the member will not become discomforted for any time as long as it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation occurs in the joints and bones, then do cauterization on the muscle at the clavicle or at the mottled cauterization points, where the joint is confirmed and the moisture is dried and the thigh is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When inflammation occurs in the stomach and moisture enters that part of the body which is outside its proper place, and if you continue the cure without confirming, then you will find that the thigh is over the left testicle, and extend your hands and legs and the cushions, and cauterize with three cauteries: one cauterization on the chest as much as the clavicle, and two more cauterizations on the two sides of the first cauterization, when the figure of the triangular cauterization appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted to make a hole.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of the two thirds of the length of the spine of the back.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	If the figure of the cauterization follows this form, and if you wish, cauterize with a large cauterization on the left side of the stomach following this form; and this is a cauterization following the circle form according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	If the stomach is to be cauterized at the point where the patient is afraid: and then you should make points on the stomach according to the quantity that you want, and subsequently cauterize that part with the cautery; and then treat that part with the cure that has been previously prepared within the stomach.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the infected wound.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the joint pain is caused by coldness or wetness or large dust accumulation, and the thigh becomes swollen due to excessive excretion, and the thigh is not comfortable, then the thigh should be made tense over the cervix, and three cauteries should be made according to this form and quantity on the joint of the hip, which relieves the patient's decubitus.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And if the space is that which is between each cautery according to the largest part of the said, and the cauteries are according to the length of the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	When you do not understand the purpose of the cautery tool.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of water that is being applied is not adjusted to the size of the specific area of the intestine, and if the thigh is resting on the patient's foot; and if it is not, then there may be inflammation, which has already extended its fingers, and lift up the patient's breasts.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And can you possibly use this cautery as a cauterizing tool, with your subtlety and prudence in the art?
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And do not rush in the cauterization process, and apply it to the entire intestine so that it is completely throughout the body and penetrates into the abdomen, where the intestine is subtle; and you know how.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the puncture of the abscess of the patient with cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess appears in the patient and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh, the thigh becomes more serious and painful.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If the pain is in the patient's shirt, then it is usually a sharp and frequent pain that has already exhausted the doctor's ability to treat the patient.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the thigh should be turned over on the table; and approximately mark the location of the hernia that is to be treated; and approximately insert the cautery in the form that was previously described on the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And when the cautery is inserted, it should be done when the entire abdomen has been burned, when it reaches the umbilicus, and when it reaches the intestine.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And it should be treated by curing the other hernias when it is healthy.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	However, this method of cauterization should not be used unless the doctor has studied this in the art of medicine and has treated many patients with similar conditions; rather, this is an experiment that some have reported to be very painful about this operation, but it is necessary for us and it is useful.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cauterization of hernias.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	When the ancient cauteries of astrology are used to treat the wounds, and this is what you hold in your hand from the wounds of astrology, and it is a long dry needle that is found, and it is of the largest kind of the said.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse it in oil and place it in the fire, and cauterize with a cauterization iron that is located between the continuation of the shoulder bone and the collar; and two small cauterization picks are placed, one slightly inclined towards the part where the beard was cut off, and two cauterization irons are placed, declining between the fifth rib and the liver, declining a little on the parts behind; and another cauterization iron in the middle of the chest, and over the stomach, and three cauterization points on the back parts; and one cauterization iron in the place that is between the two spines, and two cauterization points on the two sides of the liver.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you do not need to buy the stitch if it is in the manifestation of the code in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	The first source sentence translates to: "We have already told you that some people use iron cauterization, which resembles a torch or fire, and place it in the location between the ribs, where it comes into contact with the piercing and is pulled out without leaving any sutures, as they have said in the postmortem of the victim.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	This sentence translates to: "In this cauterization, there is no fear of scarring, as it often occurs in the location where it is not possible to heal.
Capitol .xxx.	This sentence is a heading or title, and it does not translate to
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of cauterization of the gut.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	This sentence translates to: "When you treat the wound of the gut, it is said that in the division, and not confirm your treatment, then do cauterization on it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is that you make three cauterizations or four lines according to the length of the gut according to the figure of the cauterizations of the victim, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	This sentence translates to: "And between each cauterization, there should be the largest part of a day or a few hours, and the hand of the cauterization is the hand that has been said in the cauterization of the victim.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	When you do not understand your own wound; and the patient should be on their belly over the affected area.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	Another method of cauterization is to use it without giving it time to cause damage, as has been said in the capital of muscle dislocation, and evacuate the cord that is at the end of the table, which is used for the left thigh of the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if your elevation is that it raises the cord according to the length of the body, then the points are cauterized according to the latitude of the chest.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And if you enter the two joints, carefully, in that entrance where those penetrate the cord of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And remove the cauterization; and then it is four points.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with three joints.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And if you cure the cauterization, which is laid flat for a long time, as it is most comfortable that the previous causes in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	When it comes to cauterization for gout.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not used in gout, but in other similar diseases.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating gout with your hands, if the surgical instruments have not been properly cleaned and you do not trust their cleanliness, you should use four cauteries in the circumference of the abdomen, one on the stomach, one on the small intestine, one on the mesentery, two on the vertebrae of the back, one on the upper part of the chest, and one on the small intestine.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization is appropriate for the spiculum of the ribs.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then place the cauteries carefully, making sure they do not stay in place for too long.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the surgical waste immediately after the cauterization, as it may be added to the wound and cause further harm, so quickly help the surgeon with the treatment.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cauterization is determined by what is being cauterized, whether it is the abdomen or the back, and it should be in accordance with the previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	The text you provided is not in the language of Latin, Italian,
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Regarding the cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with uric acid, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the ankle in cold water, as far as the ear and anus, and raise your hand, not twisting the cautery; and also raise your hand, and do not return to that position, for the uric acid will return.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is made in this way: On both sides of the thighs, make two points of cauterization, and on each side, make a point at the end of the cautery cuticle.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery is made according to the length of the thigh: and on one side, remove the skin and the other on the other side, the place of the thigh; and on each side, make two points of cauterization.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And keep the wound clean for a long time because some uric acid may return to it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And cure those causes that have been said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterization of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When pain arises from the abdomen due to humidity and cold, it is the digestive and retentive power that weakens, which resides in the stomach and intestines, and is treated as such by the hands of medicine and do not confess, and sometimes the thigh suffers cauterization of the digestive power exhibiting, they are cauterized with a large cauterization over the stomach according to what was done before in the cauterization of the stomach, on the circle and four cauterizations in the circuit of the subtle embolic, on the clavicle; and on the alchemy over aloes large, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humidities are exuberant and the thigh is tolerant, they cauterize that over the pentenilh and the intestines, and much adjusting two cauterizations over the stomach and part of the thighs, four are cured by the perfection of the quality of which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of ancient embolisms cauterization.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When the body's natural parts are affected by ancient embalmed or one of the heavy humors or corrupted wet humors, and they are treated as "gout" in division, not confirming the second treatment, then doctors cauterize with three points on the tip of the spine of both small and small triangles, and on the umbilical cord with two points.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face is often flushed, then doctors cauterize that part of the stomach with a large cauterization following that; and another cauterization on the thigh, and another on the abdomen clavicle, and massage the cauterization for some time, and it will cure it when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding the cauterization of the anus, prop the abscission of the same.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut the anus, do you light the cauterization that is assembled on fire.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	The patient should place their hand between the burn and the abscess, and then insert the thumb into the opening of the vein that they can feel the pulse in.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the patient has many blisters, then cauterize each one of them second that they have contacted, and then cure those which are closest to the ones that have become inflamed when they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you cauterize with a large cauterization on the skin, it will not be as effective.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitulum xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of punches that are found in nature, it is described in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, it will be cured with cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one finds a punch in nature that is old, antiquated, and corrupt with impurities and humidity, and then it is worthy to ask if this is the reason that causes the pain, and then consider the quantity of the depth of the punch in the front mentioned.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	The first line of the text translates to: "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	The second line of the text translates to: "And then insert that pointed cautery into this fistula, according to the amount needed to retract the intestine.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	The third line of the text translates to: "And continue over that point until the burnt parts of the corroded body are completely charred or two or three times, according to the amount needed by you.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	The fourth line of the text translates to: "And keep an eye on the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula is near the bladder or intestine, keep an eye on all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is near the flesh and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	The fifth line of the text translates to: "And then care for the area once it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	The sixth line of the text translates to: "And if the area is sealed, and the materials are removed from it, and stayed for a long time, you know that it has been cured completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	The seventh line of the text translates to: "And if the materials are not from the wound, you know that they penetrate or in the edge of the wound become corrupted, or cause this to happen due to those causes that will be remembered in that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not in a language similar to Lat
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterization of thorns.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there is pain in the joints due to humors or rough breathing, and if the chest of the patient is hot, then you should cover that part with a cautery, as it is used for cauterizing each joint, which helps in the rememoration.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if it is necessary to cauterize more, then there will be three lines of cauterization, and thus fewer irritations in the future.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitulum .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Chapter on Cauterization of the Vagina.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is inflammation and softening in the vagina due to humors and moisture, which causes the chest to urinate, you should cauterize that part at the end of the vagina, over the vesicle, like the tips of the thumbs, and also at the other end and on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cauterization should be according to the number of thorns; and it should be cauterized at the end of the vagina that is lower on the left side, or if necessary, at two places.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	When the cauterization is ready, it should be processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitulum xix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Chapter on the cauterization of the thorn.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When thorns enter the body and cause inflammation, and it is forbidden to treat them, and the women's reproductive organs are corrupted, and the provocation of their pain is delayed, and they experience pain due to their presence, then that place should be cauterized with three cauterizations in the umbilicus, as has been said in the cauterization of the vesica; and it should be cauterized over the point where the two are separated, or with two cauterizations, and the clavicle is used as a cauterization.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter on the cauterization of the thorn.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Chapter on the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When humors become moist and inflamed in the ankle part, and they cause the tightening of the joint, and it is said that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared to it.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation becomes thin in the other leg.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	When you are about to cauterize the thigh over the ankle of the piece with the cauterizing iron, make sure you have the handle in your hand as if you were about to touch the area, and for that, the part should be in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And it is the cauterization that precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cauterization is not at your disposal, you can cauterize that with the cauterizing iron of great olive.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And it is the cauterization according to the amount of the spiciness of the whole codena; and then cure that which is become healthy.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle part, and the cause is the cold and dryness of the vessel, the thigh is treated as if they have said and not confirmed it, and this is antiquated, you should know that you release the thigh from the large humors with either pills made or artificial or resembling pills; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the hand of the cauterization is placed in the second position: either the cauterization is made by physicians with burning irons, or by fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Second position of scientific hands, among which one is the one that cauterizes over the part of the thigh bone of the patient, and makes three cuts in this way; and it is good for that depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterization is the amount of its size and whether it is made with a thin or thick iron.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes some cauterizations are made over the middle of the neck for four reasons, which are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, make cauterizations on the circle that is preceded by the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the knee, and that it is a continuous and burning circle, and penetrates into the entire column.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the hand of cauterization in the case when pain is attached to the knee and does not extend within the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it is extended within the thigh, make cauterizations on both sides of the thigh over the location where the pain comes from, and make one cauterization on the incision for four drachms of a little part of the collar.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the cautery is sharp, and the depth of the cautery depends on the amount of the spiculum of the gallbladder.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the gallbladder is enlarged and the pain extends to the area around the foot, then cauterize that part where it is enlarged with a cautery by three or four or more points if directed by that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the gallbladder is enlarged and the pain extends to the thigh, then cauterize that part with a sharp cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Always keep in mind that during cauterization, do not use the cautery as a burning nerve or large artery, and for this reason, you may cause harm to the gallbladder or constriction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one and another of those that were cauterized on the cavity and after in the cauterization, and the fire inside was inflamed throughout the tumor achieved to the foot, and the fire was perforated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And an excessive solution of the stomach is likely to cause death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts, each part is cauterized with this point.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones advise in the cauterization of this kind of cauterization: make it resemble a circle of iron of which the circumference is the largest part of a palm; and it should be the size of an orifice according to the largest part of a tooth or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the circle is another part; and it is the space that is between them in the quantity of their notches; and those circles are opened by two parts; and the length of those circles is a notch or two notches, and make the margins of the iron slightly visible in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be lit in the fire when it is wrapped and gives off sparks, and it should be placed over the joint of the foot, the thigh covered on the lap.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And this is cauterized with three points on a line.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And it is dressed with three layers; and it is wrapped around the border and kept moist for several days; and it is cared for that it becomes healthy.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	When the doctor uses hot iron points on the patient who suffers, and burns them in that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	When making incisions, it is said that you must make two circles with perforated armilla, where the throat of the gate of iron is; the length of the sides in the abdomen of them are two noses or as those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space that is between them of the quantity of the thickness of the same; and they are opened further and further, and they contain something between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And place your hand over the part of the ankle, and compress the tube on the part of the ankle; and take water from the tail and pour it between two circles, and that quality of that is as if by a small fire, and through that suffering the masturbation and the adustion of you — that masturbation stops when the masturbation ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And raise your hand over the water and clean the water tail from all the ankle with water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	When the patient lies down for three hours and rests on that border where the navel of the remainder is located, and then stands up for a few minutes, and runs around the area; this is beneficial for the body.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And treat that part as if it were sick.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or leg, make that statue in it which contains water according to what is done in the navel engagement.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the mania of the water tail, and I have already written this in the book of the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and acid that is not extinguished in one part, and cut it into another wave of the same quality as the part that is left with a small hole, according to the quantity that enters in the ring.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And cut the end of the other wave, and put over that live alkali and acid water twice the amount that requires it for a day, and understand that these are good for the headache that leaves the water in the wave carried by the hand, and press the water that comes out of the cold water in the part that is left in the wave carried by the hand.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust all that water to that amount, and add some more live and other alkaline substances, so that that part has strong acuteness, which is maintained in the operations of medicine and cauterization of other parts, which operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines are some that are cauterized wide, such as tea tree oil and honey anacrat, and they cause a sabore in us that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Guilia reports of a man from ancient times about the operation and cure of a disease in which he was cured of pain in the knee and sciatica, and magnifies the merit of that, and says that no other cure is needed, and it is cured by a bath as recommended, where that intestine is in bath and eyes see what is from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is near to a certain herb, and if not green, then the recent fig is caught; and more often than not, it is twisted with a little of gray and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the chest, and it is seen.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	When the pain is felt for three hours or according to the amount of fatigue that the evacuation causes.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	When the body of the patient is wrapped in bandages, and the body of the patient becomes wrapped, enter that into the ground, and the pain ceases and is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	You already know that it is not necessary to use cauterization in these medicines except for the removal of the chest.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays already knows that when a sheep's bladder is used to constrict the vein and it is cauterized, it should be done with great care; and this is how the cauterization should be done: the lana should be held and the oli antic should be wetted, and it should be placed between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And if you take a dry sheep's bladder and burn it inside the joint that is causing pain, and place it over the lana and press on the entrance that is being stretched, then...
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And continue doing this, and do not stop until the tingling sensation of the biting spreads into the knee and stops the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called cauterization of sheep's bladders.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization for the pain of two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pain is in the two due to multiple causes, such as inflammation or puncture or over-evacuation, and for causes similar to those, by infusion of wet and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	When cauterization is not done in this specific case, which is caused by the effusion of free matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then, the evacuation of the foot is done with pillars fitted according to its shape and appearance, which are points on either side of it, following the third line at the latitude of the foot, as if you had to cauterize or cut in each line, according to the tolerance of the foot and the virtue of the patient.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And this is cauterization, done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you want, cauterize with three or four points, or with one point on the median clavicle according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Capital, Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Regarding the beginning of cauterization with gilbositat.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Observations have been made on this foot of the small children; and since the beginning of it in the children, it has caused an increase in their structure in the knee and the elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And wasting has been observed on the outer side of the spine of the foot and of the toes that begins to overburden the other spines.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	When you see this and want to stop it, you should burn that point with the pointed cautery that follows this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 that holds the cautery on the entire side of the spine of the hernia.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, burn in the circuit of the spine with the cautery of two or three points.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	 And the points are placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	 And then cure the area that is said to be healthy with this.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	 May you keep in mind that the cautery should not be administered in a yellowish tint, which is a spasm of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	 Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cautery for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	 When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	 And then how is gout treated by the cause of cold and not to worsen the pain, you should make the cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you have cauterized that appropriate discharge in the circuit of the joint of the foot, it is necessary to apply a poultice.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And is this the form of the olive oil for this cauterization?
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain arises in the nearby joints or other joints, and it moves to the entire part of this cauterized olive oil, then you should cauterize that on each joint with three or four points of this cauterized olive oil.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if these cauterizations are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too much with your hand on the cauterization before, just so simply around the specific area.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain arises in the knee and elbow, then administer the cauterization that was told in the capital.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is in many places and it is called sugar, then you should make points on the circumference of the fingers as they rotate, make points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain persists in these parts, then make points around the fire of the nails on each toe and on the tip of the toe.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain worsens in the ankles or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the helper's joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not remove the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is in good condition and unhealthy, this cauterization will be harmful, may God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization of wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the wound is in the ankles and the intestines protrude from the hernia, and then it begins with this, you must order the patient to eat less on that day and use gentle means for that the fence of the belly may not protrude.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient with your hands on the belly side, and order him to hold the belly as if it is getting or appears to be herniated or the intestines.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the thighs as you have attempted to break it over the bones of the patellar tendon and mark the end of which appears to be the circle of the gout at the subcutaneous parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cauterization that is this form of it:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Enter if it is a red and sharp needle.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then pause the cauterization over that mark you have made with your needle, and if you enter that you can see the patellar tendon within the thigh; and repeat it on another side if you have not succeeded in the first attempt within the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the swelling of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, that you do not burn that intestine because it does not come out of the thigh or other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you know that when you touch the cautery, do not pay attention to the bones, do not confirm your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	When the cauterization of children is done with great care and according to their size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the area of the cauterization for three days, making sure that the wound does not become worse.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of them with the other remedies within three days if they become healthy.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the wound should be covered with a damp cloth for fourteen days until it is closed and clean.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And make sure to stop the nutrition according to the length of time the cure takes for the patient's stomach, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to leave for fourteen days, give them appropriate care, and hold them for another fourteen days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it is important to work and eat well and drink water, and take strong medications, when you use this entire regimen of therapy for your health to become healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you direct the cure of the ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and so at the beginning, and you want that they do not go out, cauterize the rupture of that with the same cauterization according to the quantity of it, and it is important that it is exhumed from the codena as the last part of the stomach; and take care of that which has been said and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	When the first wound was made, it was cauterized with a triangular cautery, as this form is more suitable for the wound.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	Then a line is placed perpendicular to the wound's edge, and another line above it; then pause your hand and use a clavicle cauterization needle instead of the first one, which was placed further away and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capital, Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain persists in any member due to tightening or striking and does not relieve for a long time and does not satisfy the doctor's treatment, it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauterization of each member should be according to its size and thickness, as well as its veins and twists, and the location of the torsion and pain in the member.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the wound heals with the first cauterization, stop; and if not, continue with the cauterization. Four out of five punctures are usually on the member that is closest to the one being treated, so you can reach those with the pointed cautery when the wound is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text does not contain a source sentence number
De cauterizacio de lepra.	This line translates to "Of cauterization of leprosy." However, without the context of the entire treat
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	This line translates to "Some leeches are some times used for great benefit, and management if the leprosy which is made by putrefaction of flax and melancholy." However, this translation is quite literal and may not make perfect sense in English. The original text might be using medical jargon or metaphors that are not clear without additional context.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	This line translates to "And when you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is crusted and has been cured as they say in the division and not done, nor done, and fears about the thigh that the corruption comprehends the whole body of him and all the collection of him, then cauterize that on the head with a piece of leather: one in the middle of the head, and one further away from him, and press it towards the end of the hair; and add two more pieces of leather; and one last one, behind the neck or on the shoulder." This line seems to be providing detailed instructions for cauterization of leprosy, which is a practice that is not commonly used in modern medicine. It's important to note that this translation is based on a literal interpretation of the text and may not capture the full meaning or context of the original.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	When the last point is made, a little pressure is applied to the bone, and the intestines are displaced, so that the expiration of large vapors is relieved from the body; then cauterize on the table as desired.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already expanded over the thigh and manifestly appears, you should cover that with a cauterization point; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two on the upper lip, and two on the lower lip, and two on the two shoulder blades, and one on each shoulder, and one over the two hip bones, and one over the hip, and two over the knees, and two over the thigh muscles, and two over the tendons of the thigh; cauterize all the joints of the teeth and toes of the upper limbs and the lower limbs, and on each toe of the feet.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And keep away from the nerves that are over the sole that you do not burn.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	When some joints are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the patellar tendon and on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the anus, it is customary to do so.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Know that the fewer times you cauterize, the less beneficial and less effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cauterization, just as they had before, because the body of the patient has already become numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauterizations are large or small according to the members and joints, according to which species of tools precede them.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And properly care for the cauterization with flour of earth, honey, and the other cure, according to whether it is healthy or not.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of Cauterization for Stunned Patients.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stunned or falls asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not become healthy, then you should cauterize that stunned member according to the size of the member or its slenderness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When the sharp cautery is inserted into the abdominal wall, a few centimeters.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply this remedy to the affected part when it is cured.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes the cautery is applied to a certain part that eventually goes to the bones of the feet, spine, and nerves that move that member, and the swelling is reduced.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	This should not be applied to anything except what is known about the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves that move all the members of the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization of tumors that are cancerous.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the tumor is old and does not respond to the remedies of medicine, then apply the cautery over that part with a sharp cautery a few centimeters after the quantity of the abdominal wall has been reduced, and the color of the member has changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And apply this remedy made of flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and arngos leaves, and with saffron or with iron, to each part and they are all mixed together, and place a bandage on it and hold it in place until it is cured.
Capitol .l.	The text you provided seems to be in a medieval language that
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cauterization of the gout.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and wants that part, you cauterize that part with the pointed cautery in the circuit of the body part as it rolls.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And I will tell you the words that are cauterized at the end of the cautery in the middle location; I have not seen this before, but there is reason to believe it may be ulcerated, and I have already seen some wounds.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is said that the doctor who is cauterized in the circuit of the body part as we have said, or at the end of the cautery.
Capitol .li.	Capital.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cauterization of adhesives.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adhesives are delayed in maturation, and it is due to the superfluity of something, or the state of the body, which is old and thin, or for time, and you want to accelerate the maturation of adhesives; then cauterize at the end of that part with a small point; and apply it there so that it dries in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to drill the cautery, then you know the cauterization of this kind: and slow it down in the middle location of the adhesive as soon as the needle penetrates the coden.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the cauterization is done in that place where it was placed earlier, so that the heart of the arm is relieved; and if careful attention is given to that area which is healing.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol, Livius, or Livius Florus, a Roman
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	De cauterizacio de corrodent, or "Of the cauterization of corrosives," is
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent are wandering corrupts in the body that corrode the flesh as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you see that corrosive in that place where it suffered cauterization by fire, then you should use few cauterizing irons and larger ones as needed in that place where the corrosion occurs.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And if you cauterize that from all parts within which you eradicate the entire corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And let it be for three days, and then place your hand over the cauterized spots every few hours until all the wounds are completely healed and the corrosion is completely eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And if you care for that, may it generate flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	When the flesh has healed three times in the area where it does not become corrupt, that is sufficient; otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization over the area that is rising in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	When some cold humors attack a person, it is customary to treat them with a cut or cauterization at that location.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization should be performed as gently as possible for the patient's well-being.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already spoken of the treatment of the patient in the division, and therefore take that when the end is near.
Capitol .liii.	Capitulum XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Chapter XXXIII: Of cauterization of galls and the like.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Galls that are visible on the surface of the foot of the diseased leg, which is called gout, and causes it to swell, ooze, and affect the leg; and cauterization is performed on those with two hands, either with hot iron or with a caustic plant.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cauterization with hot iron is similar to a burn, which is made by heating the iron according to the quantity of the gall contained in each part, and it is done with fine points.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then stop the heat on the gall, and then roll your hand over the cauterization in the circuit of the gall, until that cauterization reaches the depth of the gall.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	When a person has a hard lump (called a gallstone) in their gallbladder, it can cause severe pain in the upper right part of the abdomen. This pain is often mist
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	If the person has a hard lump (called a gallstone) in their gallbladder, it can cause severe pain in the upper right part of the abdomen. This pain is often mistaken for other conditions, but if left untreated, it can lead to serious complications such as perforation of the gallbladder or pancreatitis. To treat a gallstone, doctors may recommend medications to relieve pain and reduce inflammation, or they may perform
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	If the person has a hard lump (called a gallstone) in their gallbladder, it can cause severe pain in the upper right part of the abdomen. This pain is often mistaken for other conditions, but
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If the person has a hard lump (called a gallstone) in their gallbladder, it can cause severe pain in the upper right part of the abdomen. This pain is often mistaken for other conditions, but if left untreated, it can lead to serious complications such as perforation of the gallbladder or pancreatitis. To treat a gallstone, doctors may recommend medications to relieve pain and reduce inflammation, or they may perform a procedure called cholecystectomy, where the gallbladder is removed through a small incision in the abdomen. After the surgery, patients are usually given pain medication and advised to rest for several days to allow the body to heal. In some cases, additional treatment may be needed to prevent future gallstones from forming.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	When you have found the one that suits you, take it and insert it into the other as you come over all of them.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	When treating those who have the warts on their skin that are caused by the removal of the claws, it is customary to use the nails of the doctors.
Capitol .liiii.	The text you provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish,
De cauterizacio de tremor.	I apologize for the confusion earlier. Here's a translation of the line "De cauterizacio de
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is trembling in the body due to cold or fever, or for some other reason, if you wish to cauterize that part, do so with four or five cauteries on the spines of the back, between each spine with a single cauterization; and on the chest and stomach of the patient, cauterize with holly, and over the liver.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the trembling of the patient ceases and his health improves, the treatment of the diseased part can begin.
Capitol .lv.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but "Capitol .lv
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	The danger of cauterization on the chest.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When inflammation occurs in the chest, and pustules appear that are caused by grossly corrupt materials; then at the beginning, it is best to cauterize over the entire opening of the cautery with a fine cautery under the skin, or with long-term erosion; or with slow cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes, when the inflammation is at its beginning of expulsion, it is cauterized immediately after this manner; and it is not uncommon, and the excess is broken into those parts, and they become healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is believed that this is proper for evacuation by flebitomy.
Capitol lvi.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but "Capitol lvi
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	The danger of cauterization of sweat from a wound caused by an incision of the arch.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When troops are seen flowing from the arch, which is inflamed by the plague that destroys it, or must be made with the incision of apostemas or cauterization of the member, and then seem to disappear, it is difficult to remain in that state.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When one is suffering from gout, you should cut the skin at that place and apply it to the orifice of the artery, and then place it over that which has been exposed to the veins entering that part where the flow of the sinus was, and that does not want to come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then pause the cautery olive oil a few and many, by name, and exhale over those that are not yet ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take from those a little or a great part of the location and press on that which is about to rupture the artery, over that strong vein which will remain firm in the one that has been exposed and rested, and then cauterize it so that it is compressed and held tight by the sinus.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the sinus is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you hold the one that has been exposed and remove the cauterization, then take another sharp cautery from those which are prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing this until the sinus is tightened again.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And remember that you do not burn the nerves that are here, and that will come over the other malice.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	1. You know that when the artery flows through a narrow passage, it is impossible to restrict it, especially when the artery is large, and more so if it is not one of four manieyras: if it is cauterized as said, or if it is extracted when it is not extracted, or if it is extracted when the extremities of the veins are burned and the sac is restricted, or if it is stretched over the medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the sac; and they are strengthened by the pulvinar and constrained by decency.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	This sentence is discussing the administration of restrictions to a patient's limbs or body parts due to certain conditions. It states that those who administer such restrictions should not cause discomfort, but rather provide relief. The term "tart" in this context may be a misspelling or archaic term for "comfortable" or "ease.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If no doctor or midwife is present and you must do it yourself, open the incision on the vein as they have said, and understand the great pressure that the blood has within the dead part of the plague, and over the artery, the point is not sore; and over the artery, apply water with great coldness entering if the sanc is congealed and compressed; and do not worry if it needs cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Continue with the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision, perforation, and ventosae, and of plagues and their like.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are phrases from Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	As has been said in the first book of all maladies where cauterization is convenient and necessary, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments needed for the forms of cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters of the subcutaneous flesh among the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And your procedure in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who wants it may be satisfied, and you do what is required on that matter.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you begin this work, son, remember that in this capital there is fear for you that it is in the first capital of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For that reason, it is necessary to exercise great caution in this operation, as in this capital motas veguadas catz evacuacio the one that is am sanc am le qual esta la vita deves la aspersio de la vena or incisio sobre l'apostema or apercio of exsitura or puracio of the plagua or extraccio of sageta or incizio de peyra and their appearances.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	When all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most of them the death is the end.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I warn you that on you do not fall into gout in the case of any difficulty, for some hands you will need to use the hands of other men who have experienced similar difficulties.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them it is said that if you go to their malady and you do not heal them, and because of the severity of this malady that finds in their malady, and because of the long duration of their malady, and they die from the malady that means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those it is said to you what gives you the power and knowledge, that you expect from that cure, and the dangerous malady is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent in the one who shows you the hand of that which is this manieyra; and your caution be greater than required and your rapaciousness; and do not presume any cause over it except a certain science known to you, and by which this knowledge is verified to you, and which succeeds in praiseworthy success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and French as well. Try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into English like this:
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God give you understanding and not leave you without direction and protection, for this is in your own hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	You and I order this chapter to distinguish by chapters following this one in the chapter of cauterizations, of the care of the foot within the feet, so that you can be fully satisfied with what you asked and of which there is need.
Capitol primier.	The first line of the text is "Capitol primier.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this disease is seen in children and you must give them the treatment and when the nurse shaves the child's head, his life will be saved.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are seen because of a wound that is not cleaned.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this disease but in children; and of all those that I saw who were in danger of death, and for this reason I have seen many operations in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was full of water, and his head was very magnificent until he could no longer hold it, because of the greatness of the head of the child, and less because of the moisture that was increased when the fire died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this water is either added between the ribs and the bone, or it is added after the bones are placed on the chest.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Then, if the water is between the ribs and the bone and the application is little, you must cut in the middle of the head of the child with a small fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure is two notches within which the water runs, and this is the form of the spatulum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If humidity increases and the gout becomes more severe, then you should make two incisions in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is on the bones, then you should see the commissures of the hair growing out of all parts and the sweat is flowing when you understand that this is not the end of your pain but only the beginning of it.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cover that you cut in the middle of the head with three slits according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And cut the extrated scar through all the humidity; and stretch the slits on both sides and plump them; and cover it over with a cloth and put olive oil in it for five days, and care for the wound you have made and engorge it, and tighten the cap equally; and eat the dry food that is in the member until it is comfortable and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision is considered more effective, which takes into account the size of the abscess and the collection of sweat, where some wounds are less in the occipital region, or in the part that comes down, or on the right, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the repletion of sweat appear, and follow what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	You should observe whether the artery is not torn and does not cause any bleeding, as it may cause the patient's leg to swell due to that flow of blood.
Capitol .ii.	Capitulum secundum duo.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the tearing of the arteries that are called hilasses, which are located nearest to the ears.
Capitol segon.	Capitulum tertium.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When you cut the gallbladder or spleen near the hips or chest, and it is not usually done, and no cure is given by that method, then the same cure should be used in this case of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to cut those that the patient wants, and cover the place with something rough as the drap, and support the neck of the leg with an ax; and consider where the vein is located; and the places of each over the places that are nearest to the ears, and they are hidden so much in other men's bodies.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And cover the artery that you intend to cut, and cut each one of them with the edge of the knife, and make it go inside the bone, and let it be so that the angle is at the top of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you want, enter the artery with the thumb and guide it to the parts where it needs to be.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers and a half, then when any vein is cut, the sand will be ejected with an escape pulse, which deforges by frequent pulsation.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear in the constriction, you must measure the abdomen of the amount of space three fingers, and then try to enter the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And it is believed that the sand gets the amount of vi unc., and more than that, or less, and then it follows the quantity that appears of the beauty of the thigh and the removal of the artery from the patient.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And if you consider the plague, and then if any cause of the cyst remains on the bone, you should incise there so that it does not come to apothem cautery.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And you stretch the plague with plums and limbs, and you care for that if it is cured inside that it is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	The following line appears to be in Spanish and can be translated as: "From the extraction of the arteries that are in the templates." However, without additional context, it is
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	The following line appears to be in Spanish and can be translated as: "When an old wound or catarrh is present, due to the humors of the body and their quality in the legs, or an old scar appears similar to these, and it is treated with the tools of curative medicine, but it does not relieve, we have found in these maladies extraction of arteries from the templates, or cauterization of those parts that have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The instrument of the operation and extraction of those is what the evil race of the feet provides for the toes; and understand the apparent arc in the template that it is shown by your hand, and it is hidden except in a few people by the force of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If it is hidden from you, the thigh of the evil race is strong at some part; and instead of cold, make sure to have a dry or wet place at the location where the arc appears to you as clearly as possible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And take the substance of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And burn the cord at that point for ease of entry into the arc; and then get out of it and extract that from the parts behind it when you extract it from the cord and discover those of the tunics that are behind it, in total.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, wrap that around the end of the ring, and then inscribe one part after another according to the quantity by which the extremities of the vein are tied and are contracted, and it will not cause a leak of sweat, for if they are not inscribed, the sweat will not flow from all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	When expelling the urine of a man, enter three times.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, you should cover that with two pieces of cloth or strings that are doubled and not too tight, and do not leave it on until the putrefaction has passed through the consolidation of the plague and the evacuation of pus.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then, if possible, reduce the superfluity that is between two limbs; and do so at that time or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that with a pointed cautery within the bone that is cauterized, and keep it within the cuticle when the extramits are incised, and stay in place of that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient does not have fever or is not in an advanced state of sepsis; for cauterization is of those causes that help to reduce moisture, and therefore it is better in its youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover the extraction of the arteries that are coming out of the old loculus, and place them over the polvils decently made, and then apply it as a curative measure to the medicines that make the flesh grow better and the calves enter when they are healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	When you are working on another vein that is bleeding from the artery, if you touch that artery, or with cauterization, or by pressing on the area to hold it tight, and stretch it inside so that the artery is held tightly.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If the cause of that is not present to you, then stop on the place where the artery is tightened, and close the place with something wet and cool, and make it stronger after the sharpness has healed, and it will be stronger afterwards.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	If you are doing an extractions of the artery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cauterization that has two points, pushed that you have seen the two loci, and stops quick, but not too much, inside that if they reach the bone and separate the vein in two parts, so that it is elongated as much as possible, that no parts are not held by everything of this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of the cauterization:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of both points is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	When however the pain is sharp and better than two punctures, then if the pain is sharp and soon comes to the flesh of the foot, and does not pass quickly, it is necessary to make a point in the flesh of the foot.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	And when there is any swelling, the heat of the fire is held in those places and the flesh is slowly cut off.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all works and leaves little room for improvement.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between two punctures is the amount of swelling of the said.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of the chest of sharp and acidic gout of the heels.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the gout of the heels is sharp and acidic, and the chest of those veins which are over the test of the skull, and do not comfort in any cause of medicine, and sometimes the face of the foot becomes erect and stands up as if it were the front of a walker, and the heels become extenuated, they become humid like when their nails were new, and the toes are scalped by the sharpness of the tears, the old smells in the cure of this operation, and the name of this cure is far.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to cut off the hair that is on the top of his head, and insert three incisions into the forehead, separated by a distance equal to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two inches, the first incision should be engulfing far from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second slightly after the movement of the eyelids that are on the eyelid, and the third part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep an eye on the incision of the arches that are in two lanes, and extend your hand for the continuation of the teeth.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is three inches adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge pad or cloth that absorbs moisture for those that dehydrate the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And place the sponge between two sharp edges, of which this is the form of the incision of the wound:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the beginning of the template to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	When the entire coda is in pain that is between two cuts on the ribcage, and it migrates to the second cut, it is called gout by doctors.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And if you want to go deeper into this wound and enter it with another hand, another instrument is needed, called a scalpel, sharp at one end and blunt at the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the cut of that sharp part with the skin, and the cut of the other blunt one with the bone, and push that which has entered through the fissure back into its original position, and separate all those that descend from the head to the toes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May it be continued until the cut is completed from the other end, and it may be entered into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And push that the amount of blood flows out, remove the knots of the sutures.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And stop in any fissure that has a thick horn, and stay over those powders that are full of oil and vinegar, and see that it does not cause an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and give a large infusion of water or serum, and treat that which is engorged with mercury, olive oil, and other substances that are used to cure the plagues that have been cured.
Capitol .v.	I apologize, but the provided text does not contain the word
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	I apologize, but the provided text does not contain the word "Capitol" and it is not a medieval medical treatise in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It seems to be a different language or a misunderstanding. Could you please provide the correct source
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When cold humors accumulate in the feet and continue to worsen, and the legs become thin, and their eyes are ulcerated and the hair is lost, and in the prepuce of the penis there is acute pain and extensive tearing, you should know that these accidents happen due to the materials and humors not entering but through the veins of the parts dependent on the legs.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for this is to order the patient to lie down, and to insert a knife into the front of the thigh, making a small incision in the middle of the forehead, starting from the medial side of the right temple (and continuing along the fissure of the left temple); and insert it into the bone; and extend it into the joints of the fingers that are not covered by the mustache; when it reaches the bone, stop.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Wipe dry all the remaining moisture with a clean cloth or sheet, and place it between the two sides of the fissure of the cut or wound.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And if you find that the wound is not closing, use poultices made of herbs and oil to prevent infection.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has decreased, cover the wound with a cloth made of herbs and oil to prevent infection. Then treat the abscess with a paste made of flour and colloquium four parts and one part, and mix them together, and apply it to this disease on the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text does not contain
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	The translation of "De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas" is: "Of the cure for this gout that sets in the
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The translation of "Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia." is: "The cause that gout sets in the joints is one of four species, which are either mineral pebbles or resemble mineral pebbles, like iron and steel, or are of plant origin like clover or fennel, or are a cause of fluxion like water and its semblance, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	The translation of "E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio." is: "And when gout sets in the joint or another cause resembling those causes that do not fit or are not believed in the joint, and stop the joint to the sun, and if it sometimes shows the peyra, distill the olive oil or slime of that one particular cause of the stornutacio, and administer the extraction of the stornutacio, and make the patient feel better about the stornutacio, and allow the patients to see the outcome of the stornutacio.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then pause at the circuit of the ear some pieces of wool or linen, and extend the earflap to the parts thereof, as many turns as possible, without forgetting these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is no bleeding, you should administer an extraction from the part using the instrument called the epicicarious gesture, which is as follows:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If you forget the gesture, do not worry; and if not, you should administer the extraction from the part using this subtle and slight gesture:
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	If you do not forget this, then you should make a small incision in the arm and enter the end of the needle into the hole of the anus and close it with cera and olive oil to prevent the needle from being scratched until the needle:
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And if you extract from the upper part of the thigh, few women have encountered this as yet, according to what I know:
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If you do not forget in this maneuver, you should hold the halka alumbat or the vech aparelhat in the part where the nails are pressing on the skin of a cat, and place it at the end of the ray, and then gently push over that corner:
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And if you insert it into the hole of the anus, it will be easier, and extricate the anus from the moisture:
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	If none of the causes are forgotten, which have been reported, then you cut at that point where it seems to go through the tendon or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The manicure of that is what you cut at the beginning of the vein of the sephalic saphenous and extracted from the second manicure of the virtue of the foot, and then close that cezer between your hands and convert the aurelha into parts of it, and if there is a small fissure in the edge of the aurelha you need to put the grease in the place where it is most needed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	If there is a fissure of lunar figure within which it penetrates the foot, and if the foot is atrophied, remove that part as much as you can using appropriate instruments; and immediately close the fissure at that time with speed, and cure that within which is sane.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	E if the cause is in the aurelha it is one of the greases that have been swollen and inflamed, then you administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your advice, then you need to hold the spumina under your thumb according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	When administering care to that abscess, take the one that is cut in the thigh.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not do this when you think that it has been moistened by the steam of the thigh, and pause there for a while, and take out those from the nails or hands, or from any other part where they have been inserted, and if you find that the extraction is difficult, then proceed as follows:
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that is inserted in the thigh, which the patient uses for sniffing, and fill the thigh with cold water, and place the water on the thigh where the abscess is, and if for some reason it is forgotten, then so be it; and if not, take a few hot stones and place them in the fire, and heat those in the patient's thigh, and the patient will insert one of those in the opening of the thigh and press it with another stone on the same part and press it with a hot stone on another part of the thigh.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop doing this until all the water is forgotten.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	When the urine is forgotten that you take from paper or cloth, and place one end of it in the anus and stretch the other end outside until it is dry, then it will be remembered again.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if you use and another cloth and make as many loops as possible within the urine until all of it is forgotten, and then stretch that to the side where the extra urethral opening is said to be.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of animals that enter the anus, if it is small, it can be pulled out with a gentle hand and according to its appearance, treat it as it has been said in division; but if it is large, one must administer the extraction of the head and testicles, and the cause of this is found in all the other causes that are seen in the anus.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms that are born in the anus, when you treat that as directed in division and in the treatment of distillations and do not comfort your cure, then cover the anus with sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If here any cause of the gallstones appears, then extract that part with the greatest effort or with one's fingers, unless no cause is found, then take a needle and push it through until it comes out wide, this being the form of the gallstone:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	When the extreme part of the joint is entered into the hip according to the amount that suffers from the gout; and then it is given a little more force, and is made to move in a circular motion, until all the vertices are turned.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey my instructions, then I will ask you to leave and close the circuit of the canula as we have said; then you should administer distillations of those that have already spread in the treatment of the vertices, and find it in the chapter of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And is your discharge that which funds the medicinal oils in the hip, this being the form of the same instrument by which this is done.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of gold, straightly, in which there is a small hole, and it will be easier to use.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so be as it is inserted in the cavity of the canula of continuance here where necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ring and wrap it gently around the end of the canula slightly cotton, and place or oil in the concavity of the ear, or some herb, or that which you want of these medicines in the canula — and this is in the hip —, and then enter the ring into the hip and exhale from your mouth when the oil has been expelled in the concavity of the ear and the gout feels the oil.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When something is wrapped in the glove, it has already been cut open by a small focus.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And you should know that the cause which is distilled in the glove is not too fragile, for the glove medicines do not suffer from this.
Capitol .vii.	Capitulum VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the treatment of rheumatism in gloves.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some people have observed that the rheumatism of the glove is caused by the intestines of previous generations being exposed to the wet or dry, and that this rheumatism has been found in men and women, causing pain in the meat of the glove due to inflammation or lack of nutrition; and some have observed that this rheumatism is caused by the opening of the wound of the glove that does not fit well, and some have been found in the parts that are deformed.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And if that which happens in the opening of the glove, which does not understand the fit, is found in the major parts of difficult treatment, it should be treated with great care.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And if you are able to understand the fit in that case, then you should place the glove of the thigh on the sun and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If you sometimes see an apparent swelling, open that soft part of it, which is the form of the foot:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it is where the width is small, the part of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the swelling is from two legs, the one does not cause pain to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is from flesh that is hard in the ear or in the foot, open that soft part with small points and press with great force until it is completely removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the front of the ear, press softly with a small point and heat that part for a little while, and then place it in the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have seen swelling in the foot that the thigh becomes difficult to open, due to heaviness of the limbs, try to press the oppression of the foot with difficulty; and do not hurt the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And stop in the ear the amount of air that you have blown into the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the abscess; or if you take any and press it into wet clay and powder over it according to what you use, and if the ear is already inflamed, you should replace that which you have taken out and switch to another one that you blow into the ear which is red, within which the abscess is located; and take care of it until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If blood flows from a wound, submerge the sponge or cloth in clean water and place it over the wound, and use another cure that restricts the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment of conjunctivitis, which ends in the eyes.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Conjunctivitis occurs in the eyes, which is caused by certain humors, and some are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must have those hands or feet, and cut off the spots where the nails are, and place your hand over the parts that are sore.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If pain comes from the flow of blood, then you should cauterize those points with a sharp cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the incisions and sharp points return to the skin when any cause of the nails is removed; and when the cauterized hands are burned, those nails are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	This appears to be a medieval medical treatise about treating inflammation or swelling in the eyelids, also known as "grandeyssa" in this context. Here's a line-
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	When visible veins appear in the eyelids, it is often due to a cause that results in swelling and inflammation in the eyelids, and this condition is called "grandeyssa.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	When there is an addition of thick moisture in the eyelids and around the eyes.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is that you consider it necessary if the growth is coming from there in water that appears in the eyelid and is worse throughout; and the cause of this is unclear.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, pay attention to that wound in the latitude, and remove it from all parts as easily as possible, and suspend it over the fire and allow it to fall.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If you are not able to identify the beginning of the wound if you do not push your finger into the eyelid little by little, then it is not clear in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, you adjust it with the suture; and care for that after it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer much for that later when the anguish of the remaining part restores itself and becomes carnified.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the growth is declining in the parts of the eyelid, you must superficialize the edges, and then cover the growth with a piece of cloth, another that you ask for the beginning, and press it on all parts, and if the eyelid due to the wound is elongated, then it is not clear in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	When approaching the incision, wash the area with salty water; and care for the location that is clean inside where it should be healthy.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The cure for the swelling in the inner corner of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Swelling is caused by the one that is generated in the inner corner of the eye, and especially in children, it worsens the bags under the eyes and causes them to droop; and they cannot see the clearness of the sun because of this that makes them look sad.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And have you ever noticed that those eyes look sad all the time, and even when they are sleeping; and on their eyelids there are wet folds, which have already healed inflammation, and are prone to redness; and when you touch the location with your fingers, you feel redness in those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one of the operations that is done on the inner corner of the eye is to stop the blood vessels from coming out of the socket, and to stop the dryness of the eyelid and the redness, and make the circle according to the quantity that contains the calgua of the whole part, and to stop that over it and touch the eyelids with your fingers for the total that is added to the circle, and to add to that over it and touch the eyelids with your fingers for the total that is added to the circle, and to add to that over it and touch the eyelids with your fingers for the total that is added to the circle, and the fissure is not greater than the fissure that is made in ophthalmology.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	When cutting the cloth before you arrive at the arcernach, remember that in the more recent processes, the arcernach is processed through a fissure according to the form of white grayseza.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those that you have folded between the thighs of the patient, according to the parts that are deformed and rolled between the right and left hands, after it is cut.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And remember not to adjust in the fissure because the sputum does not reach the hole and it will cause that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see your arcernach at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a small ease after processing the arcernach; and extract those that have been said; and submerge the cloth in water and wet it, and put them over the place and stretch out those that are powdered.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so that they do not cut the sal and leave it in the cavity of the fissure because that is what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for that after it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	When you arrive at the site of the cautery wound, treat that area with ointments as soon as it is clean.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.xi. is not a complete sentence and does not
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the fingers of the hand.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the tips of the fingers are affected by the natural and antiquated adjustments, you should immediately cut off those parts of the finger and make ways for maladies that cause constant tears and softening of the eyelids and skin, which is called tactinir of the hand, and it can be treated in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine as it is said in the capital of cauterization; or by cutting and suturing; or by cannas as you direct.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so, please hold the foot's heel in your right hand; if it is converted, then so be it; and if not, make a small hole in that where the seam of the skin was on the inside of the eyelid, and insert the hole into the seam, and thus it will — the edge of the eyelid's margin where the fingers were — the fingers, and pull out the part from the edge of the eyelid, and convert it to the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And in the part of the eyelid where the lashes are close to the incidence of the lacrimal major on the lacrimal groove; and then extract the eye and place the eyelid slightly open, and cover it over the eyelid that is closed, and see how it resembles a glowing ember.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But may I say that the figure is different according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for it has been diversified among men, and out of those some are such that they require a great deal of elevation according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And if you have placed something on the skin over the two lines that you have seen, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural lashes, it resembles the largest of the kings.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the nail in one of the two angles of the collar, and scrape it all, and adjust it to the curvature of the two lips of the mouth or the fur of the lash subtle, and remove the sand, and make it adhere if there are any excessive parts of the fur over two folds on some causes unseen, if you want to do this, and if not, do not care.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	When it is necessary to close the incision of the testicles, do so within three or four days and take care of that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you want, close the wound with your suture, and take care of that which dries and constricts, and keep the eyelid closed until the plaster of the plague and its addition have healed; then remove the suture and proceed to the next stage.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in this case, there is concern about the thigh, and it is good for the operation, and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method for dressing, and you should see the eyelid as if it were a piece of meat, and then raise the eyelid by three or four inches, separating it according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do this, then keep the eyes closed, and do not touch them with your fingers. Then take a loop of thread and put it in the eyehole, and enter the other eye with the larger lacrimal, and the other with the smaller one, and adjust the eyes so that they are equal, and raise the upper eyelid according to what has been recommended, and lift the entire lid over the eyes.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the holes of the plague's wound with a suture, and cure that entrance which is healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	When you suffer from an abscess, whether it is on your skin or in the flesh, apply this abscess remedy to that part and its appearance, and it will heal.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	If some warts appear on the eyelid that have been converted into skin, then you should use that which has been said of the abscess remedy; a more natural suture is needed in those places.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Applying this form to cancers is second only to this method.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And if you convert the eyelid and cut the figure that is next to it according to what I have reported; and as a rule, make cancers or small stones of those that are similar in length to the eyelid and in latitude to the latitude of the spathe.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And if you have already closed the ends of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And add any subtlety that is superfluous to the abscess remedy of the eyelid, and constrict the cancers of each part with a firm structure, and lay it aside for later use, as the coda for the stricture will die and be rejected and become moist within it if it is inserted into the cavity.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is too late, you should cut off the tail of the boar, and properly care for the wound that has been made.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When the eye is healed, the eyelid is raised and the lashes do not scratch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to apply ointments that you make after this method:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 and it had the quantity of longitude and latitude, neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	 Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the eyelid is raised, the lashes scratch because the eyelid is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the eyelids are artificial, hard and sharp, and the lashes scratch them, you perform the operation on it by taking a soft needle and placing it in that soft part of the neck, and then adjusting the ends of the eye and not the nose.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the longitude of the soft parts is about the size of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then, you can add another soft part on top, and if you want, you can cut off the ends of that one.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then, place the thigh in the most comfortable position, and it is suitable for the surgeon to declare that your work is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	When introducing the needle into the adjusted eye socket that requires an injection, make sure to push it in firmly through the eyelid until the desired part of the pelvis is reached.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the pelvis in and insert the needle through the hole, and it should be one or two or three needles at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then pull the needle out that is inside the pelvis, making sure it is not stuck in the eyelid of the natural pelvis.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If you are not stuck in the eyelid and the pelvis is not stuck, pull the eyelid out at the parts further away from where the stitching was done, until the desired part of the pelvis is reached that has been stitched.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And when you have reached the desired part of the pelvis, pull out the needles and the stitching, and close the wound, and leave it for two or three days, until the pelvis adheres to its place and covers the good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the pelvis is not healing quickly, you may need to adjust a longer pelvis of the natural pelvis, and raise it up, or that one should be elevated within the space that it occupies, and then you will raise it.
Capitol .xiii.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in the language you described
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	The cure for a stye in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When a stye appears in the eyelid, and the eyelid contracts when pressed, either on the left or right side, due to poor consolidation of plague or cutis or cauterization, and this is called a hordeolum, and it can be natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of plague or cutis or cauterization, or by resemblance to them.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the glove of the operation in it be that you press the consolidation and separate the labia from it, and place it there as soon as you find it between those two mechas of drap, and tie them when they are cured.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And you do not need to use cure for the cause that dries it out, as long as you return to the hordeolum with pus that has not been heated for any time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on that cause that mollifies the skin as it is gently rubbed, and apply to the water in which the tears and semen of it are collected, or engage the vagina, the which is liquefied by the oil, and submerge that mecha in it, and cure that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The first line of the translation is:
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation, which has been described, is none other than a correction of the anal area by an excretory system that does not return the location to its original form.
Capitol .xiiii.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of eczema, which is caused on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This acne is made in the eyelid, which is naturally made of acne; and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	It is more accidental due to plague, scission, cauterization, or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a double-edged knife and put it in the flesh, and fix it in the flesh, and that the skin passes from the inner corner of the eye to the outer corner of the eye, across which the filament penetrates into the extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh to the parts where the knife is and cut it with the knife, and insert it into the sputum.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if you return the figure of the eyelid to its original shape, then so be it; otherwise, take the mirror and fix it in that position, and transform the eyelid, and close the other fissures in the corner of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the other fissures of two angles of the incision are made, which you have made by converging, and that angle is made between them when they gather together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is written in Greek letters: the letter "lambda".
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove the skin of that part according to the quantity that the gout has left behind, so that the eyelid is not affected.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread; and treat those that have been told about the softening medicines and the baths within which they were cured.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you use a cautery to close or suture or cauterize, you should know that you must place a flat cut over the eyelid edges according to what has been described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And separate the bath between two lips according to what has been said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the cure of the surgeon when it is done or removed, that runs in the operation, according to what has been prepared by the form of the surgeon, and that is in the form of different waves.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artificer saves all the time preparing an engine in each hand which is possible to enter when returning the figure to its natural form, or rather of that, and that malus according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the larger possessions.
Capitol .xv.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to some men who have solidified the eyelid with something inserted in it, and it has been prohibited from facilitating movement and their natural works, therefore you should enter the extraction of the eyelid from where it is inserted, and raise it upwards or extend it upwards.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And if you insert the adhesion of subtle sweat under it, which is not like the sharpness of the incisions, they have a little one so that the thigh does not get worried about the operation, and leave the sweat that does not affect the husband's acuity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And if your incision is like this, they can exfoliate that adhesion with ease when it is returned to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And if you put in the thigh salted water with which you wash, or distill it in the sun and dissolve it in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you separate the eyelid from the thigh with calm and place your hand on the thigh, and leave the last quarter of the album of the husband to be used for consolidative causes when it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a mix of different languages or symbols. Could you please provide more context or check if there might be a
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a mix of different languages or symbols. Could you please provide more context or check if there might be a mistake in the text? I'm here to help with any questions you have about language translation.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a mix of different languages or symbols. Could you please provide more context or check if there might be a mistake in the text? I'm here to help with any questions you have about language translation.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a mix of different languages or symbols. Could you please provide more context or check if there might be a mistake in the text? I'm here to help with any questions you have about language translation.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	I apologize, but the provided text is still not in a language that I can recognize or translate. It appears to be a mix of different languages or symbols. Could you please provide more context or check if there might be a mistake in the text? I'm here to help with any questions you have about language translation.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	If you follow this advice, you will succeed in relieving the pain.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And if you proceed to open the eye, insert the spoon into the subtle or small forceps, and press the flesh of the eyelid naturally so that by inserting the spoon, no continuous flow of watery substances occurs.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if someone has a cyst that is extended or filled, it is said, and it is called the lemon of which this is the form of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal membrane and ensure that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And the insertion should be made in the hollow with a little salt twisted or cut from the nail, and it should be changed the other day; and the care of that is that it comes in so that it becomes healthy.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the cyst is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it in that place, then this species of cyst is treated by doctors and is cured with the medicines recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to open that, you should open the thigh of the patient and take subtle lemon from the sharp edge according to this form:
am subtilitat.	The first line of the text is "am subtilitat
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If sometimes that rarified and confined substance is released and entered into the body, then it distills from your urine into the wound, which can be either sour or salty, and is filled with pus on the following day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And if you repeat the operation over that wound when it is completely healed, but if there is still some blood in it, then you should clean that wound and treat the abscess at the beginning of the next day when it is cured.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation over that wound when it is completely healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the rarity of the tear duct is noticed in the wound due to great pain, it should be suspended on one side; and incise a part of that one, and do not leave the incision open so that no fluids of lachryms flow out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And if it distills from the tear duct and is salty, it should be treated with salt when it is cured.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	When the inflammation is caused by cold humors that have infiltrated the flesh of the body, it is called gout.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some redness appears on the soles of the feet, and it is over-pampered when it covers the pupil, or it is applied or rubbed over the eyelids and soon the eyes become swollen and inflamed, and it is assembled near the baldness.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation on the foot is that the patient should lie down in the first position; and you work on the soles of those and collect all the flesh that can be easily separated with your fingers or with tweezers, and you cut the flesh at the beginning when everything is finished inside the incision, and keep the foot away from the patient's operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And is your incision at the place where you cut those or at the edge that has been recommended in the operation of the ungual, or at small forfexes that are collected according to the shape of the foot that this caput takes?
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then when your incision is completed and the whole flesh is moistened, you fill the hole with salt twisted, or drop some rose water on it and resemble the red powder of the album of the hoof, and place it over the cut corn entro that it is secured from the post-operation inflammation.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If the doctor suspects any cause of gout and is careful with cauterization, and fears the aftermath of cauterization, then leech the wound and treat it as such, applying the ointment to that operation as soon as it is cured, and it seems to have an effect on the flesh that occurred in this hollow.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, I do not know if all cures of the hollow through natural or accidental means, iron can help, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of sand in the hollow.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sand that comes from those that are rough and cover the hollow, and prevent the operation of the wound, and lengthen the hollow over days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary to begin by considering whether the hollow in which there is sand is strong and not another disease that is sand, then collect that sand.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And is that you command the thigh to hold your hand in the upper part, and suspend those veins under one or two of your caution; and this one is a subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	This line seems to be describing a process of gradually inserting two objects into a single space. A possible translation could be: "Two objects are inserted gradually into this form in the second
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	This line appears to be discussing the process of securing two objects to forceful but subtle veins, and then removing them once you see that the veins are becoming more relaxed and less knotted. A possible translation could be: "After securing those forceful but subtle veins with two objects, remove them once you notice that the veins are becoming more relaxed and less knotted.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	This line seems to be advising the user not to cut the horn at its extremities and to be careful during the operation, ensuring that only the veins are cut. A possible translation could be: "Do not cut the horn at its extremities and be careful during the operation, ensuring that only the veins are cut.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	This line appears to be advising the user to distill the horn once they have completed their operation, and to ensure that the acute corners do not become too sharp and cause pain. A possible translation could be: "Once you have completed your operation, distill the horn to ensure that the sharp corners do not become too sharp and cause pain.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	This line seems to be advising the user to ensure that all necessary tools are available at the time of the operation and to apply pressure to the area to reduce pain, and to continue doing so for several days until the pain subsides and the area is sure to be healed. A possible translation could be: "If you do not have all the necessary tools at your disposal at that time, and apply pressure to the area to reduce pain, and continue doing so for several days until the pain subsides and the area is sure to be healed.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then you repeat over the second hand that has been made healthy.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing hernias to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with cauterization or with acute medicine following the narration of the case, and it is not cured, then you do not engage in it but rather touch the aposteme with maturity of the case, and take out all the moisture that is in it, and if it penetrates when it is discovered, the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is discovered and sometimes in corruption or blackness, you then treat it with a tool of this kind:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is made of sharp metal, and it is heated to redness, and the cap is made as if it were cut by a razor or an alizarin by fine points (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupt location of the bone, and then rotate it between the fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that this cessation is rased.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity,
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the wound is well-consolidated and heals with good flesh and the body of the thigh is free from disease and remains so for forty days without renewal or postmortem and no accidents occur in it, you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	However, you should not be in the area unless you can reduce the fissure to the shape of a nose, and then follow this method: and it is that you will discover from second week am iron or am medicine sharp, and when you discover the iron, you take tribo next to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The extrusion of the iron is triangular, and it should be the first one to be extracted from the extremity as often as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place the iron over the bone, and that is the one of the lacrimal; and along your finger a little of the horsehair, and pull back your finger as much as possible, and roll the tribo in as it penetrates all the bone, and that will feel the pain as if you were cut by a knife.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the location of the medical stimulants that dry out the skin, as you have just done.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	When the flesh and the affected area are in pain, you return the matter that has seeped into the damaged parts to their original position, therefore, it is placed on the thigh.
Capitol .xx.	Capitulum.xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reducing the prominence of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel is prominent in its entirety and does not cause pain during walking or decrease in size, you should relax the thigh, and place your hand over the area, and place the scarification cream on the heel that contains aloe, sarsaparilla, and other ingredients, and strengthen the cream on the heel with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the powder for the dust is what you take from the four corners of the leopard's hooves, and each corner is doubled into four parts; and make of those four parts.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those on one another according to the quantity that the heel needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And strengthen those with hard dust and firm tightening; and repeat the cream on the heel's scarification; and remove the cream and smooth the heel every day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	When the ligament is softened, you should cover it with a layer of grease.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	Then remove the ligament at the day and night according to what has been said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the hernia has already been reduced, then so be it, and if not, you should repeat the plastering on the powders and the stricture and the wounds as they become healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the enshrine of the eminence of the uvea tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uvea tunic, and it becomes prominent and proceeds outside the eyes as if a grain of sand, and its form is distorted, and you want to enshrine it, then perform the operation on it as has been recommended, that you enter the agula into the socket of the uvea from the side where you have left it, and place another one on the part where the double agula is located, and make it penetrate and press the first agula according to its disposition; and then inscribe the location of the double agula and raise that part of the uvea in the circuit of the agula and tighten the mot.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	When you have removed the gallbladder and placed it on the table, insert the needle into the injection of alcohol in the album and let it enter as soon as the thread comes out of the vine.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And apply this remedy to the wound that is comfortable for the thread to enter as soon as it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some veins are found in the entire circumference of the drap that enters the wound, and it is perforated with a subtle puncture that comes to the preon of the wound, and the humidification of the abdomen descends and enters as much as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And apply this remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness known as gout is not the same as that which is adjusted in the gallbladder like water from a descent and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The most important thing in treating this illness is that you apply the remedy to the wound with the dressing on the exposed part and dry it, and make sure it does not descend and remain dry, and this remedy will see its causes as they occur.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	When it does not come down below, you know that it is wet.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it is not prepared for the descent to the anus, as they have said, then you should place the intestine between your own thighs and gently press on a small part of it with your fingers, so that the continuity of the conjunctiva is maintained on the cornea of the eyeball (within the corner of the eye), and if it is not forgotten, the anus.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, if it is forgotten, you should dilute the water in the tail with which you have mixed salt or water in which you have already built a sugar solution.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is cured of other causes, then enter that it is healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the healing of the water that comes from the tail.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	As they have already said the specifics of the water in the division and which one corresponds to the declaration of health, then you should do that second to maintain your health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You should make sure that you place the intestine between your own thighs over a cushion and the wet tail, the stringent one.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then pause for a moment near the eyelid of the eye that is opposite to yours, if the one that contains the water is the one that is opposite to yours; or if it is your left eye, then pause near the one that is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then hold your left hand near the one that is on the right side, if the one that contains the water is the one that is on the left side; or if it is your right eye, then hold your left hand near the one that is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then pause at the end of the finger that is opposite to yours, near the largest part of the ramus of the bone that forms part of the lacrimal ridge, and then hold your hand with your thumb and index finger, and turn your thumb towards you and towards the other hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then insert your finger into the bone and feel that it has already penetrated due to the pressure.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And if the measurement of your finger is greater than the size of the space that is in the pupil and enters at the end of the iris, and it is the top of the bone; then you will see that the pupil is in front of the eye due to the clarity of the corneal membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	When entering the location where the poison is, and when you hit it with a needle once more, and if the poison descends so much, then you should put the intestine over the place where it will most likely see its vision, and enter the inside of the leg.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	If it is only a small amount, then if the poison descends, you should remove that other vein as much as possible so that it will not be damaged.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	If it is not descending, then you should easily remove it, and divide it into small pieces, and dissolve a little bit of clear salt from gemma in the poison and wash the hollow with it; and leave outside the hollow or stopper or infused oil on rose-colored albumin and ligua to wash the hollow with it.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	We know those who were in our time who passed over that which was consumed by the albumin of the lamb.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey my order to enter the hollow of the eye because of its hardness — for this is the cause of many men who have hard eyes — then I advise you to take the sponge that is called alberid of the quality of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	When you have pierced that joint, do not hurry to remove your hand from the wound, and do not leave it unattended until it is properly dressed.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then enter again when they have finished.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must prepare the compliment of your work, which is to be placed on the side of the patient's bed, with their head resting on a pillow in a dark place, and should be free from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Then pause in the nature of the gout so that it is lined with its natural skin, and do not allow any part to be cut off on either side.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the limb be in line with its position on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove that from the dark place and expose the visible part, and look for any causes, and return the limb on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	You should not make the gout in the time of the curers or too much in the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	If you have covered that the gout is made with water that falls on it very quickly and strongly in regard to looking at it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you accidentally receive an electrical shock, you should immediately cover the affected area with a cloth. Then, within the next seven days, correct the position of that part that has been affected by the shock.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	If you cover the patient's face with a cloth, place your hand on their cheek for the purpose of regulating their breathing for a short period of time, there will be a darkness in the following days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And if you gradually reduce the patient's pain and converse with them about their causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in alchemy, there is no excuse for the disciple of vision who has seen certain visions, and therefore you should be careful about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to our knowledge that some of those who have seen the Artach visions, and the Artach said that he makes fire in the Ayrac Magdaam by pouring it into the one who succeeds the water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I do not believe that you have seen this in our land, nor has it been written in the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of Magdaan that are over those who know them, and those who do not know them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitulum quadruplo quarto.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	This sentence seems to be discussing the treatment of a condition related to the flesh or meat (carn) in the nose. Here
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various hardened flesh (carns) adjusted by some cause, which is assembled at Scorpio of motz feet or polyp eyes; and this disease is called polypus, as it resembles that eye represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	When the flesh of the malignant tumor is black in color; and when the flesh of the lion is not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	In this case, where the leon (lion) is not fraudulent or cancerous in these cars (thighs), you should make the malaute (incision) between your own thighs and set it alight, and bleed the nars (veins) of the lion, and pick up the tip on those thighs.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	When removing the affected part, and if you comprehend that it is caused by a subtle gout substance within that part, then you should know that the entire flesh has been affected; if the cause of this is possible to remove, you should use one of the subtle instruments to facilitate entry into that part where the Roman rubs the cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If your lord has an affliction or accident of gout, you should stop at that place; if it is one of the malignant gouts, you should cut and cauterize that within which is sanded and all the abscesses are opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And if your gout is in the nose, then it will be seen and wet or dry.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If your nose is opened and the humidity process is inside the palate, you should know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not enter after that place, you should know that the flesh has nothing in the pus bones of the nose that has not been opened by the abscess.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then, if you cover the opening with your hand, wet it with water, and pause between each dose to measure the quantity of the said or that cause, and enter the vagina and insert one end of the cord into the anus or another part of the body that causes this possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And suppose that this has been done, that the fragrant odor enters through the canals of the nose and is perceived on the golfball, which is seen by many children at school, and it is a cause that someone wants to do this.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extramits of the cord, one end that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then apply tightness to the flesh of the lips with the flesh that is inside the cord, and you will know that the flesh has already been inside the lips.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the cord, and pause in the nose at the abstraction of the sac one calf, and you will know that after three days or more has passed until it is completely rotten that comes from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	When in doubt about the cause, stop at the nose with a hypodermic needle for a few days until it is cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If there is no remedy available, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of the instrument that the barber uses, which is composed of oils and medicines in the nose.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	If it is made of silver or gold, which resembles a small lantern that has been slightly bent and the metal seems to be, then it is correct.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you want, make the needle closed as a cane, and the needle of the barber's instrument is flat and exposed; in which case it is a handle at the bottom of it, where you hold it when you pour oil or water from the sebum and causes that are watery.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	These purifiers are expensive: a recipe for enography of castor oil, white wax, ginger, and saffron, and long pepper, escaglia, and spice ana unc. use as a remedy for blood and col, and they are made into pills, and the water is added to the guava tea, and it is placed in the nostrils of the patient.
Capitol .xxv.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not a complete
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	It seems like there might be a missing word or two in the sentence you provided. However, based on the context and the language used, it appears
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Here's a possible translation of the sentence: "Watery discharges are seen in the external nostrils, and they are magnified and inflamed on some days, especially when the eye is exposed to the gaze of another.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	When you have covered that with the beginning of the appearance of the patient, and have completed that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then pause over the location or use cauterization or medicine that is in the place of the patient.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is made late after the patient has become large, you should consider if it is made hard, dark, of black color and with few feelings, then do not touch that with your iron, as it can cause cramps; four marks are given to that which is being incised in this way by the great malice over that which that had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the cramp is of lion's touch and not of black color, and sometimes it is possible to incise all of that, then you should remove the thigh and incise that part with fear, and cure the location as much as possible that is exposed and concentrate within when it is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose and lips and the forehead when the continuity is dissolved by pus or seemingly.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when you find a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confidence is given in that operation except for some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Thus, when it happens to any of those causes, which you consider if it is caused by cold humors in the body, and you adjust the lips of the wound with suture thread, and you carefully enter that part which is healthy.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of the wound are already separated and every part is healthy, you should cover every part of its apparent entrance when it bleeds.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And you should adjust the lips of the wound with suture thread and tighten those, and over them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and essential oils, and place a dressing made of consolidated plasters on top, and leave it for two or three days, and then replace that and turn the dressing and make sure that those holes are closed when they are separated, and carefully enter that part which is healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The hand of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or as needles have been recommended in the suture of the stomach, or add the solution of continuity to the flesh as you and know.
Capitol .xxvii.	The text you provided is not a complete sentence or phrase, but rather a reference to a
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	This line seems to be discussing the cause of pain or discomfort in the lips (doas labias). The phrase "en las partidas dedintz" is not clear, but it might refer to specific areas or parts of the lips. A possible translation
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	This line discusses the appearance of wrinkles in the lips (labias) of certain people. The phrase "apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs" could be translated as "hard, wrinkled like the skin of old people," and "alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors" could be translated as "some are more wrinkled and others are more severe." A possible translation of the entire line is: "Wrinkles appear in the lips of certain people, resembling the skin of old people, with some being more
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	This line seems to be discussing the treatment of wrinkles in the lips (labias). The phrase "convertas las labias e fendas" could be translated as "convert or transform the lips and corners," and "duricities de tota part" could be translated as "wrinkles throughout the entire area." The rest of the sentence is not clear, but it seems to be discussing the application of a cream or ointment to the affected area. A possible translation of the entire line is: "Therefore, convert or transform the lips and corners, and apply the cream or ointment to the entire affected area, making sure to cover all parts and cleanse the area with an antiseptic before applying the treatment.
Capitol .xxviii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a language similar
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great! Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then pause over the area that has been cut or another type of sharp or excitating powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, you should insert it secondarily and cauterize it, so that the cauterization does not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for iron teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the parts of the jaw and between the gingiva and the gingiva are found rough, hard, and some are black and are citrine or verdigris due to corruption inside and are fissures in the teeth that are found.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you should open the thighs between your legs and place the head of the knife at the top, and cut off those teeth in which those rough and hard points appear and seem to be caused by some other cause, and that is black and citrine or other causes among which they are damaged.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if that is all that is said in the reasoning, then so be it; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning over those parts on another day and the third and fourth until you come to the statement you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You should know that teeth require various types of incisions and figures according to the preparation for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For so that the razors can reach the tooth from the side of the gum, and these types of incisions are prepared according to the ones you will make, which will be the deepest:
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Treatment of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Make sure that you cure the tooth of its pain with all your skill and after the complete removal of it, where no cause is found that satisfies the flow of the vein when it is removed, where a substance comes out that enters when the removal is excused.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Make sure that when the gum is ready to remove the tooth, you are certain that the painful tooth has the vein passing through it and that it is in a healthy tooth, and you remove it and stop the pain within which the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have seen in surgery of the beards.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you need to certify which tooth is painful and know that you can scrape in the circuit of the tooth as it is saturated with the substance that is any virtue, if it is dissolved from the gum of the tooth of the whole part, and accordingly make that am those teeth, or am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And it is better to have large hands for good speech or cutting, and place the mouth of the tooth between the teeth that hold the one you have, and then draw the tooth secondly in the manner that does not touch that, nor the greater pain in the mouth.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if you do not forget, then take one of those instruments, and place it at the end of that tooth with ease and effort to remove the one that is made at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is quiet or burned, you should know that you complex the tip of that and tighten that am the extremity of ray subtle per so that it is not squeezed in the time of your constraint over that am tenalas.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	When you have very carefully performed scraping on the entire circumference of the gingiva and kept your strength so that it does not weaken or damage that part of the body, and then return to the thigh for the major pain of the patient.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And remember that you do not cut off what barbers do in their own practices and arrogance towards the eradication of them, as they do not follow what has been recommended; four ways come to visit large men who are difficult to treat, and whose health is improved in all, or some of those, or that one is removed from the jaw bone of the mandible as many ways have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And the eradication of the tooth is washed with the mouth by the dentist or by the dentist.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is any discharge from the gum, as many ways have testified, then remove some of it with your fingers and scrape over the wound, and if that does not cure it, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and their subtlety is such that the teeth at the beginning are of long external extramitation, of thin grip and thick, so that they are not bent when used to perform those tasks.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they are as many as times of thick grip that enter when they are not bent, but are thin extramitrates.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And there are false teeth of Indian steel that are descentments of the right extramitrates, and in the extramitrates of those there are teeth of the kind of the beak of a goose called "cuckoo" by its name, which is strong, and they are of strong constraint.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the eradication of teeth and of the stripping of the bones of the tridented mandibles.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the eradication of the tooth that is tridented according to Roman law must be done for some cause, then you should place your hand over the location and press or hold the extramitrates of those that are assembled at the beak of a goose called "cuckoo" or "goose" by its name, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey my instructions and use these forceps or pliers, it is likely that you will cut the skin and dissect the entire flesh and insert the instrument that is called this, which is a small lever of this kind:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It is of thin end thick and not bent so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If by mistake the skin is cut, then so be it; and if not, help me with these other instruments of which this one has the following shape: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extrusion in which there is any thick part.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it is a triangle and has a thin pointed end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help me with this instrument which has two ramps of which this is the shape of the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	 And help me with other instruments which I will use in cutting teeth; the best is this one which is assembled like this large one and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The first line of the translation would be: "From the sharp or short end of the tortuous or short triangular extremity, which is any large one and not filled with anything that is not triangular." However, this translation might not make much sense in context, as the phrase "tortuous or short triangular extremity" is quite specific and may not have a direct equivalent in English. It could be better to
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	Here's a possible translation for the second line: "And another advice is that you use the teeth of the other instruments, as they seem to be similar to the others." This suggests that the text is providing advice on using different tools or instruments, and that the teeth of certain
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	Here's a possible translation for the third line: "But the skilled artificer is subtle in his craft, and he fails because he follows the instructions given to him for the operations and different diseases; four are of those diseases that the ancients did not describe or use any specific instrument for, due to the diversity of species." This suggests that the text is discussing the limitations of ancient medical knowledge and the need for adaptability in modern medicine. The phrase "four are of those diseases" could refer to a specific set of diseases or conditions that were not well understood by the ancients.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here's a possible translation for the fourth line: "But if it is not triangular or filled with anything in the jawbone or other bones of the mouth, or if it is rough, then it is better to treat it as such in its place, as this is convenient according to the instruments and forceps that have been mentioned for the extraction of teeth, and this is the way: ...". This suggests that the text is providing advice on how to treat different types of dental issues, depending on their specific characteristics. The phrase "as this is convenient according to the instruments and forceps" suggests that the advice is based on the tools and techniques used in ancient dentistry.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	If there is any small swelling little by little, and it is bound or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak through the whole bone is empty; and then restore the place with appropriate medications for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is a small crack, you must report that of that crack and its color, and treat that inside so that it becomes healthy again.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitulum.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Chapter. De the cure of the prominent teeth over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow the natural course of the body in that form, and especially when it is in women, and especially in the elderly, therefore you should consider: if the tooth is nothing else but another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or apply a linament to it, then you cut that one; rather than it being annexed to another tooth, you insert that one into this instrument of which this is the form; and it seems like it is from a pig, and it is made of Indian iron of extramitation with sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	If your tooth is aching and you feel pain for several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it is not caused by another tooth, then it is called a toothache.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the tooth is exposed to mercury, then you should apply mercury of Indian silver in this form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	If it is all made of mercury and the mouthpiece is smooth; and if it has points like needles, which are inserted into the tooth as many as possible in a short time to make it easy not to cause another tooth to become painful and rot.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line up the tooth in the mouthpiece, and adjust it according to the razor blades.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If the tooth is cut and the tongue touches it, then you should cover that with your finger that the edge of that fragment is not sharp and not broken, and it is covered so that the tongue does not touch it and the word does not rot.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of tooth decay, use silver or gold.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth are affected by concussion and displacement, caused by percussion or hammering, and the jaw cannot bear it, and you have treated that with medical tinctures, but it has not been effective, then do as follows: use your hand to press on the area, and do not let the jaw move to those that are stronger than gold and not silver, for silver turns green and soon sticks to itself on those days, while gold does not change at any time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the shape of the recce is that you grasp the gold and hold twice as much between the healthy teeth, and as you grow, the twists of the gold between the crooked teeth, or if one or more, enter when the tissue reaches the healthy tooth of the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And repeat the pressure within the part of which you began, and tighten your hand as much as possible and know that it is not harmful.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And your firm hold on the gold forces the teeth that did not escape to relax.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	When you descend the excess parts of the bladder with forceps or tweezers, and add those to each location as needed, and convert them along with the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the crooked tooth, so as not to cause harm to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And you should follow that advice like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it slips or breaks, hold on to that or those with another hand in the same way for the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the section of healthy teeth and crooked teeth, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return a tooth or tooth to its socket in the corresponding places, and they regrow as advised, and remain strong.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is only done by skilled artisans and surgeons.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some bones are suitable for the cause of cow bones, and they are made in the form of teeth, and placed in a location where the tooth lacks, and are strengthened as advised, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text "Capitol .
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	The first source sentence is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It seems to be a legal or administrative term, possibly related to the Roman legal system. Without more context, it's difficult to provide an
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This language seems to be a form of medieval French or Old Provençal. Here's a possible translation:
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation in this case is to open the mouth of the patient, and if there is anything inside, remove it; then lift the tongue, and insert it into that nerve following its direction within the mouth after the language has been released from its recent use.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any pain or difficulty in that area, and this is for the consolidation of plague, then you should cut and separate that part within which the limb has been split and the nodosity has been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And remember that it is not a true fissure in the flesh of the limb, and that you separate here the artery and the coming flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And wash the clothing of the incision with water, or with wine or vinegar; and place your hand further down the tongue; it is then that you hold the thigh with your other hand to prevent another injury.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If you have a flow of blood, place your hand over the wound site; if the blood is coming out, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that fits well to this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And this treatment is for the other causes within which it may be cured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The extraction of pus from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some wounds occur in the tongue, causing it to twist resembling a small piece of cloth that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and if it is magnified, it is more beautiful within which it has swollen the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	When the operation is made in the male, it opens the mouth of the urethra and considers the apex.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see the urethra of dark color or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch that part.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is inclined to whiteness, where there is humidity, you place the scalpel on it, and insert a small spatula under it, and insert the rest of the portion; and if you find it in your hand during the operation, you stop immediately with the forceps, as it is restricted by the suture.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And return to your work when you have treated it with care, as it is washed with clean water and salt; and care for that as in another cure when it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitulum xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Chapter 36 on the extraction of the apex of the male urethra and of that which is nothing in the groin and of the other apices.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you have discharged in the groin well, those are glands which are assembled like cloth, which become deformed and are not female apices, which when you treat them as it is said in division and they do not become healthy, you consider if the apex is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, you do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If the request is for redness and the area is large, do not touch that part with iron; instead, leave it there, and let it be, or tear it off if necessary.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If the request is for whiteness and transparency, and the skin of the part is delicate, then handle that part as if it were fragile.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation in that part is what you consider, taking into account the completion of the scar or if it has decreased due to any decrease; and then the thigh is sewed down, and the end of the thread should be in the upper part, and the server should bite on the language of the patient, and the servant takes between their hands the noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	If it is made of silver or gold, and it is delicate like silk.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then how you present the thread to the patient and show them the scar, and then cover that with your thumb and hold it in place, and pull that through the parts as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Otherwise, if you draw any cause from the membranes, and apply that instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is assembled like forceps, but the extramits of it are turned around, so that the opening of any one of those is at the end of the other, which is made of sharp iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at your disposal, insert that sharp piece of the one that is the form of this, and make sure that one part is sharp and not the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And perhaps you have inserted honey, insert the other after this hand-like instrument of insertion, and apply the insertion to the foot so that the foot is moistened with warm water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If perhaps there comes out pus, moisten it with warm water made from the decoction of milk or honey and similar to that of the causes for stitching, if the flow of pus is restricted, and treat it inside so that it becomes healthy.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some vessels may be found in the groove of other stitches or another of those that are made of golden hair, and insert those after you have said in the insertion of honey-engulfing stitches.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	When I had already treated a woman with apoplexy, which was born in the abdomen of her, this apoplexy tended towards a dark color, with few symptoms, which had already closed the abdomen of her, and the woman breathed directly, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had been pervaded by death for many days or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	When the aposteme had already suffered so much that there were half a dozen rails within which it was forced to pass through two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then, please handle it gently and remain in one of the holes, and pull out that one, and tear off a piece of it, and take hold of that part of the large piece, and carefully insert it into the other wound, and carefully put your tongue in the mouth, and take a sip of its saliva, and keep the hole in that aposteme.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then, remove a large portion of it, and do not run from it unless it is a little bit of sin.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the guillotine of that woman is absolute, and began to drink a lot of water, and carefully watch her, so you did not stop inserting into that aposteme holes for a long time, and this aposteme became located in place of that one, which was inserted inside when it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you should burn the guillotine of that woman, and then add this; and carefully walk around and do not say what God did to that woman's prophecy.
Capitol .xxxvii.	I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text "Capitol .xxx
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada" translates to "Of the incision of the uterus when it is post
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba." translates to "When catarrh is present in the uterus, and it is incised and long, it is made perpendicular to the incision; and if it is in the thick and round part, and it is called a bubbly one.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When gout is cured and they have said in the division, and it does not comfort your cure, and you see that the swelling of the foot has already gone down from the ankle and is subtle, then you should cover that with a cloth that you have rolled up into a cone; and if it reaches that far, and is bloody, of a dark or black color, and does not reach the center, then you should cover the incision of the foot, for there is fear of the thigh.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you see that the second manicure that I have told you about is white and long, which you make on the thigh and press the tongue of the patient with the instrument by which its form is given and it fits at the nail, and take that down and insert it into one of two instruments that are called in the incision of two needles.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And cover that with a cloth that is not inserted until after it has been adjusted over the natural term, for if you insert it too much, you will lose the sound of the voice.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And when you insert it, use that which has been recommended in the incision of two needles and cure it within that is healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the thigh were terrifying due to the pain of the patient, it is necessary to use an iron in the cauterization of the wound, and the hand of the cauterist should not be but sharp water, and that you hold the head of the thigh in your hand, and press the tongue of the instrument with which they have said, and press the water that has been said at the top of cauterization, and comfort that living cause, and do not make it too wide or subtle, and from that fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	When the patient's cavity is located where it was previously placed, and the medical instrument is placed on the vagina, and the mouth is opened over the vulva for the saliva or mucus to flow out due to the intrinsic medicine, so that the same cause does not affect the groin of the patient and cause pain.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And take hold of the medicine with your hand, and apply it to the uvula for the time that you see there is no pain or swelling due to the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take the forceps and wrap it around the end of the finger, and immerse the forceps in the medicine, and insert the finger into the cannula through which the forceps adheres to the cannula, and do as many times as you can until you get what you want from the cauterization of the gum, and let it dry and crack after three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you instruct that the medicine is to be repeated, repeat it, and let the cauterization abstain in the circuit of the gum with the forceps immersed in the border, and modify it according to that water that is in the circuit of the medicine, and make it clean with fresh water, and cure it from the swelling, and finish it with what is necessary for the healing.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This remedy for healing is placed because it has been incised and lengthened for fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	This appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's my attempt at translating the given source sentence:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	If there is obstruction in the throat, enter the extremity through the mouth of the patient and let steam reach the uvula on the side where it is blocked. If the uvula is not blocked, then do not enter.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And if you iterate over those dry spots, do not make this curacy at the end of the event of apostemata, as too many will adjust in the apostema, and do not assume that you are making it, but rather make the declaration of apostema of the cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and make a closure of the hou in the extramition of the patient, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, as the hou's closure prohibits steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this curacy is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capital.xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extracting spines and of the water that adheres in the groin and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Obstructions are found in the groin or on the sacral vertebrae or on any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	When you see that the pain is not what it appears to be, over which you can see the eye, then please place your tongue on the instrument entering solely through the mouth, so that you can declare to the patient that this is in the gullet.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if it does not appear that it is hidden in the gullet, then please make the patient vomit through the mouth, so that the food that is digested in the stomach is expelled from the gullet; or that the stomach vomits a little water, or some of the intestine, or a piece of sponge from the sea leopard, and it is held firmly there, and the vomit is passed through that, so that the stomach can be emptied.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And may you catch an eel and hold it firmly by the tail, and it will be drawn out easily; or hold a turtle in your hands and pull it out slowly and carefully.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if you do not know the causes that have been said, then please use an instrument of measurement in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	When there is a large amount of thick liquid that resembles a small piece, and during the extraction it is possible to make the cavity easier by entering it into the patient's belly.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And if the patient's head is raised on their shoulders, and you guard that part of the head that touches the neck, so that it does not hurt the bones or the spine, or that the midwife has her hand there.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, that part of the thigh that is entered is usually wet, due to its knowledge of the location of the cause attached and relieved below, and pulls the hand away from it using the instrument, as long as the quantity prepared is taken into account when it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extracting the gallstone attached to the gallbladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the gallstone is treated as advised in the division of the cure by physicians and does not relieve, consider that part of the gallbladder in the patient's belly, because you have not yet compressed the tongue of the instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the sign of inflammation, extract that little or that subtle gesture gently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove that, then take a concave needle and enter it into the affected area of the thigh, and place a hot iron at the concavity of the needle, and make as many punctures (as long as the inflammation is not mortal and is in the thigh) and abstain from giving too much water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And if you take a full mouthful of water and work the mouth of the patient in that way, and rinse the mouth with that water; and do not transfer any cause to that and give water to the patient an hour later, so that the inflammation decreases as much as it does when water is drunk.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If you do not forget that they have recommended, take a substance such as cinnamon or saffron to smoke the thigh or the uvula with the instrument that has been recommended for smoking in the sufumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, it is done in four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	This appears to be a description of a medical procedure involving the use of smoke (sufumiguacio) for sterilization (subfumigacio). The procedure is performed on a patient with a wound or injury, and the smoke is applied to the affected area using a tool called an instrument. The smoke is then directed towards the patient's mouth, which is placed over the end of a canula, to ensure that the smoke does not escape until the procedure is complete. The purpose of this procedure is to sterilize the wound or injury and prevent infection.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If the patient does not cooperate, you must repeat the sterilization process using different methods until the patient complies. It is also important to ensure that the patient does not consume any food or liquids, and only drinks clear fluids such as water or broth. This regimen should be followed strictly to ensure the success of the procedure.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the tool used to treat the wound or injury. It resembles forceps, but has a curvature in certain areas. The specific shape and size of the tool will depend on the location and severity of the wound or injury.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And what is the table for the gout patient, and its end resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharp, in which it is sanded down with lime, so that when any cause is found, it does not hurt.
Capitol .xl.	The text you provided is not in Latin, but rather in the
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the sum of the sermon is in apophthegms and in sections of theirs.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and French as well. Try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into English like this:
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And so various in perforation and section of them by different hands, of which one is for the specificity of stitches in them; and therefore because of the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second hand is proper to the places where the accidents of the body occur, that the stitch in the head is another than the stitch in the buttock; and the stitch in the fleshy part is another than the joint; and for each of them there is an operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And perhaps some stitches are those that do not pass through but are at a mature stage of the sinus in them or as an addition to them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other stitches are those that are not passed through when they are crossed, and are not mature by their complement, as the stitches that are proper for joints, where one stitch is for each joint, the one being prolonged within what can be reached in the circuit of it, and more so if the limbaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is a proper stitch of the principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it within its matured end in the principal member; or it is a proper one for the buttock, so that you do not perforate the cru, not due to incompletion of digestion, but because it is proper for the buttock, so that the onset of the wound does not elongate the parts of the dint, and it becomes a fistula or is at the end of the term of the member that is not cured.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the time for the incision of the appendix, and it is ready at that time.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	When you know that the maturation of the diarrhea and the cessation of the fever, and the decrease in the delirium and the pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know that the incision should be made in the area where the abscess was previously removed and from which the purulent matter comes, and from the curing of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the incision should be made on the length of the flesh or of the chest, if the abscesses are in the parts of the thighs or feet, and in places where the tendons are, the cords of the nerves, the arteries; and, at last, in all places that do not reflect, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in the flesh, it is better to make the incision when the digestion of the second part has been confirmed, as they have said; and if you make the incision at that point, the length of the urethra is prolonged, and the mouth of the abscess is deepened, and the lips of the endurated labia are stretched.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	When you administer a small puncture, and in the large areas of the apostemas with a large puncture and wide or cuts according to the variety of the size of the apostemas.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other parts of the apostemas where the codena is cavity and fixed, when it is made with pan and fixed in the term that already exists, as that which happens in many doublets and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not yet cut, have three angles; and of those that are cut, in the quality that is cut, it happens like the figure of a thorn of a rose, as the apostemas of the anguillifors.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are in the quality that is cut, round and lunar section is given, and it seems like those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Less of that in which there is not like those that are surfaces of the apostemas leons, that you make a puncture in that with a surface puncture or so flat, only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the apostemas is large and has already bound a sane motiva, you perforate that and do not touch what extracts all of the poyre in that hour; there is extracted from that one part, and placed the apostema within another day, and there is extracted a larger part, and there are made motas watched according to the graduation within what is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	If the wound is from a sharp object, or a tight grip, or a small child, or an elderly person, and the animal spirit has resolved itself at the exit of the sickness, and you operate on it, then you can return it to its original state.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take this warning with great caution, and pay attention to the hole you make in the post, as it may cleanse the wounds and consider if the wound of the post is small or flat, and then you should manage the wounds of limb or antler; and if the post is large, and the fissures of the hole are sharp, then you should be careful that you pause mechanically in each joint as they appear.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the post a part of the tendon is separated from the muscle or has been concaved in the circuit, then you should know that you complete it with antler or with a piece of cloth as when you have cut or burned, how much humidity; and stretch that within the third day; and proceed to treat this and cure the one who cares for the wounds that are inside and become healthy.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you happen to lose blood during the time of your operation, you should immediately administer cold water and apply it to the areas that are swollen, and place a cloth over the location of the visible wounds.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood persists, you should ensure that you are providing regular and proper care and medication to the areas that I have recommended in various locations of this free and independent nation.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during winter and the site of the blister is in the area with the most nerves, you should ensure that you wrap the powder in violet and oil-based cream, and place them over the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is during summer and the affected areas are rough, you should ensure that you apply moistened powder or oil-based cream to the skin, and keep it wet until the last day, as advised, and ensure that you remove the blister and cleanse the area, providing care for the wound as needed to make it healthy.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And it is also necessary to know the treatment of blisters universally, more so than the specific method for each type of blister, as I have already mentioned in the previous paragraph about the cure of all blisters.
Capitol .xli.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	The sentence "De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap." translates to: "Of the sections of bets that come in the crown of the head
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	The sentence "En la codena del cap petits apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz; e las specias de lor so motas." translates to: "In the crown of the head, there are small bets, and those are of special nodes that contain tunicae for them; and their special motions.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	When they have sexual intercourse, and those that seem to contain liquid resembling honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain liquid resembling polls, and similar to them; and of those that are hard, rigid.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as you have to extract from them without causing harm to the archer.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	 The operation in the section of those is what you expect from them with the instrument of that form which you know contains, and enter if you are wise.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it is that this contains liquid, then divide that by section according to the length of this section, following this form.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section of line .B. to enter at line .G. Therefore, when the liquid is evacuated, you remove that part that contains that liquid, and do not fear any cause for all, for many return if they are Roman of that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And if it is present, submerge the cot in Egyptian water, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with plague and let it enter another day, for this will corrode all that is Roman of that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	When you have already made incisions on the Egyptian-like coat according to your needs and instructions, if you trust that there is no cause for that film; then cure the plague on the Egyptian-like coat when it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If you see large knots, then you should insert the following form into that:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	Make a cut without form, and place knots between the two lips of the cut and the end of that part, and exert your skill in extracting that tunic.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If you find that the arch is against you, then you should know that you have been first encountered.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And if it seems that the plague is divided into cuts and cures according to what you have said; and if the cut in the plague is pushed back, then it is less of a wound and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some people have symptoms of these plagues that are in the head of men who do not have any moisture; the cause is what you have inserted over an arch in the head of a young woman and hardened the arch as if it were a deaf, sharp, white, which could not be pierced, and if that happens to a person, the plague will affect that.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	When injuries occur in the head of another cap, this is not the same capitol, as the injuries that come to the heads of children and you must know the reasons for these holes, but all of this is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those who have a lower part because it is possible that the cause of the disease is in the parts with a lower part.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply those remedies that are appropriate for the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrophulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Wearing these bandages on the neck and shoulders, and some are injured in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and those bands that are produced between them, and all scrofula of these is found in its own skin, and so as in the nodes and bandages of the head, so as they have advised.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the specifics of these scrophulas are warts, four of which are some hard, and of those that contain humidity, and of those that are malignant which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	When you see good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color of water that is manifest is properly to the color of the skin, and is not attached to any part of it, nor to the nerves of the collar, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not preonded, covering that which is dry superficially of the part from the part of the other side of the line of .G. within the line of .B., and burn it throughout the entire part, and extend the two lips of the skin from one, or from both if you need them, as has been said in the apostles of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And there is more caution that the vein or nerve is not inscribed.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the sweat is not hot, that does not adjust to your skin or disturb the thighs, and that you have inscribed water that is not necessary to be inscribed; then if you inscribe the vein or artery and forbid you from your operation, you should stop on the glass vitriol trissat or other powders that remain fluxes of sand, and stretch the plague, and lay it within that which repairs the sharpness of the apostle and makes the plague mollified and begins to be porridged.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the wound is separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation once you have completed the abdominal cavity.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if you find any other small pustules, insert them and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the great vein of the pustule, cover those who have not inserted that pustle into its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Cover that with something that is quite folded and that lets in air when it falls to the ground.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And fill the bath with water that you have already submerged in Egypt, and take care of that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you insert the entire pustule, cover that with something that you adjust the lips of the bath and cut as much pus as possible without causing any unnecessary inflammation.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you think that there is unnecessary inflammation due to the size of the pustule, cover the root with something that understands how to insert the lips, and remove it and stitch it and do what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	If that pustule contains moisture, make a superficial hole in it at the location where you see it to your maturation location, and stop making holes until the pus from the head of the bust comes out, as they have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And if you need to make an incision, use a sharp knife and follow the same path as the previous one, because this is where the pain of the corpse comes from.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound has already been cleaned, then cure that sharp knife made of flesh inside which is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 33.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the syringe of the plaster, an accident happened to the goule.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Cut off the old section of this syringe in the plaster, and have not seen any man in our land who did that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Few men have this disability, covered with the fact that the extraction of the plaster is avoided, as by this no good can be done for all the veins and major arteries of the thighs here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Fewer are those who have plasters in their mouths or goules or two holes, when the thigh is not in the canal, covered with the section of the plaster to avoid losing the loss that is made by perfection.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Thus, when you wish to do it, make three or four small cuts around the circumference of the circumcision, or four in the middle of each distance between two circles for quantity, where the cut should be in the perineum, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for a cut, where there are no fatty tissues and the screws of the scar are loose.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor is afraid, cover the hands that extend the gallbladder as much as possible, and cut the gallbladder inside when it comes to the channel, as this will avoid the screws of the scar if there are any causes for them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then make the incision according to what has been recommended; and it means over the cut of the channel for the flap that is of that eyelet which is of you and for the abscess of the wound.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And keep the wound clean for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Thus, when the hour is set in which the perforation is done, add a few drops of the gallbladder juice, and that will be enough for the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And properly administer medicines that make the flesh more comfortable when it is healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	1. Then I command the wound to be cleaned thoroughly when it is completely consumed by the malady; and the malady of the patient lasts for three days; therefore, I order the wound to be cleaned in this manner, and cure it within that time if possible.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	1. And as you have seen in my practice, it is because a section of the lung's bronchus is blocked and inflamed, and you were called for treatment, and the wound was cleaned as the mucus is from the lungs, and the plague was discovered and the wound was cleaned of the plague that had been in it.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	1. Therefore, you confessed that it had not been infected with veins or inflamed, and the wind was of the plague, and cured it within that time if possible.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	1. And do not despair of the section if it does not cause pain in the vote, and return to your duties within the next few days.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	1. And now I tell you that there is no fear in the section of the epigastrium.
Capitol .xliv.	The text you provided is not in the language of Latin, Italian,
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	When there is a cut on the testicle that occurs, and it is called a hernia of the testicle.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hernia of the groin is called hernia after the color of the body, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	When there are two hands, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no remedy.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is followed by two hands, one resembling grass-like nodes, and the other resembling apothectem, which is made by node of an artery, and there is fear in that.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not seem that this assumption is true in the same way as iron in that which is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And I advise you to investigate that and if it resembles grass-like nodes, and is not suspended in any vein, then you should insert that as you would the nodes, and extract that from where the pelvis and bursa are; and otherwise, you should examine all of it, and cure the place from which it is believed to be curing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of section of the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodes have special motions and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	When you advise so that the difference between node and exit is known.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	You say that exitus is heat and fever, and violent pains come when the heat of the superfluity is suppressed; and putrefaction stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Nodes are not heat or fever, and this cipher is the one in the bag that is of the u sac proper.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And then comes the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cube and it is made to be as a vase, either larger or smaller, and there are two species, four or five, which are grasses and contain humor, and the colors of the humor are motes, according to what you say in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of nodes, what you expound is that and inquire about it at the beginning, what is called intromerent, according to which its form comes to the head that is this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the inquisition of the apothecary and all nodes, and that you take this intromerent and enter it into the moist place where it atrobes in the apothem, and you roll your fingers on it as much as you know that this intromerent has already penetrated the coda.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	When the last one is done and the size of the hematoma is measured, take out the screws and consider what is inside the wound.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the moisture is forgotten, of whatever color, you should insert it as a superficial cut as I have said in the other hematomas.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture on the wound of the screw, you should know that it is heavy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Scrape over it with a cut not in the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As he taught you, suspend the screw, and remove the entire wound as easily as possible, and if you can, keep the belly or bag over it and take out that suture from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If something breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy one, and you should see this as soon as possible, and you should remove it as soon as possible from where it does not cause any disease.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If something causes a disease, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you ever notice that the Roman has any small part of his body affected by sharp corrosive powders, then add some water to the plague and strengthen it, and place it on the spot where the plague cautery was made, and treat that with another caustic treatment.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is large, then you cut the lips of the Roman and treat him with what is appropriate for that.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If it is pulsating, then you cut and heal the place where the glass was cut that was broken and straightened, and let it stay for two days or three until the plague stops and the boiling of the sand ceases; and then return to untwist what is Roman.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the caustic necessary in section and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the intraments, and there are three kinds, which of them is the greatest, and of the others it is smaller.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the intrament greatest is this one:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the incision is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of intromition is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are the types of intromission:
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	This is the form of the experience, and one of them is called bridewell.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	It has three species, four of which are large, more and less.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the great experience is the form of the:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium-sized experience is the form of the:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experience is the form of the:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is therefore suitable for those wounds, incisions, fistulas, and abscesses that enter those of the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And these points are large, like great needles, and are made with the greatest care, and are made of lead, or of copper, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of lead.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And these points are the experiences of black plum, which are made to fit when they are opened, the fistulas in the cavity of those which are reflected by their reflections, which are reflected at their levity at those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	It has three species, four of which are the longest, and the others are more, according to the quantity of the ample of the fistula and the stricture of the:
Forma del experient gran de plom:	This line is not in the same style as the previous ones and seems to be a description of the shape of a large
Forma del experient migier de plom:	This line appears to be describing the shape of a smaller or more delicate experience, possibly referring to a medical tool or instrument
Forma del experient petit de plom:	This line seems to be describing the shape of an even smaller or more delicate experience, possibly referring to a medical tool or
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	This line appears to be describing the shapes of gallstones, which are formed from specific types of bile. There are three main types: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	This line seems to be continuing the description of gallstones, stating that they have a specific shape or form, and there are three main types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	This line appears to be further describing the shapes of gallstones, stating that they have no specific curvature and are of three main types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	This line seems to be continuing the description of gallstones, stating that they have three specific curvatures and are of three main types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	This line appears to be stating that all of these gallstone types are necessary in their respective locations.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	This line seems to be describing the shape of a single large gallstone, but it is incomplete and does not provide enough context
Forma de unci simple migier:	This line appears to be describing the shape of a single medium-sized gallstone. However,
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	This line seems to be describing the shape of a single small gallstone, but it is incomplete and does not provide enough context.
Forma de unci orp gran:	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language similar to Latin
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The translation of "Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu" is not clear without additional context. However, if we assume
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The translation of "Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu" is not clear without additional context. If we assume "unc
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The translation of "Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas" is not clear without additional context. However, if we assume 
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The translation of "Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas" is not clear without additional context. If we assume "unici
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The translation of "Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvatas" is not clear without additional context. However, if we assume "unici
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The translation of "Forma de unci gran havent tres curvatas" is not clear without additional context. If we assume "unici
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The translation of "Forma de unci migier havent tres curvatas" is not clear without additional context. If we assume "unici
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The translation of "Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvatas" is not clear without additional context. However, if we assume "unici
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	The translation of "E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc." is not clear without additional context. However, if we assume "unici
Forma de scapel gran:	The first line of the text is not in English, but it seems to be describing a
Forma del scapel migier:	The second line of the text is also not in English, but it seems to be describing a larger
Forma de scapel pauc:	The third line of the text is not in English, but it seems to be describing a smaller
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The fourth line of the text seems to be describing the different types of cuts or wounds, with some being sharp and causing more pain, while others are not as sharp and are not as painful. The author suggests that these wounds are made for the purpose of excoriating nodes, or hardened areas of skin, to prevent the formation of varicose veins or nerve damage. The author also mentions that this procedure helps to heal the area and relieve any discomfort caused by the excoriation process.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	This is one of the forms of magical amulets, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see in the pictures.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large amulet:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of the medium amulet:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of the small amulet:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Their effects are similar to those of the rays of the sun, and they produce an alkaline effect.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the external application of the pointed alcohol that the hidden effect is found, and in that course over the parts of the fingers and nails, when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spirits, which are placed between the dots that you see, and do not penetrate the flesh, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of venous amulets, which are used to stop the flow of blood, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. The forms of the blood:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Their effects are similar to those of lemons, round in shape at certain lengths, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When these winds are present, it is necessary for you to use many, fewer, and some, in order that the blood may flow quickly when the abscesses need to be opened, and you should not rely on medicine at your first attempt.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Do not use these winds to open abscesses throughout the body, and do not use them except in locations with fat, such as the legs of the changes and the hips, and the mammillae and stomach and the nipples and the ears, and similar to those of the carnous lacerations.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some instruments are painful, looking similar to small knives after this form; by which the blood is opened when it is cut during a flebotomy, or you must incise the vein or the artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some instruments are round in this form.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of the nipples of men who are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some instruments are inflated for the nipples of certain men, you must follow the rule of sleeping as it begins to be hairy, and if they are inflated, and the nipples are assembled from women, and Roman apostates, leave them.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the one who has gout arrives, cover that with those lunar sections according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and remove the entire gristle, and add the plague of the carbonized medicine, and adjust the lips of the plague as it is cut, and cure that which is sick within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast declines towards the parts on either side and is softened by its great magnitude, as in women, then it should be divided into two parts, each of which should be placed above the other, with the larger one inside the smaller according to this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. And remove the navel that is between the two lips of the plague, and remove the dimple, and attend to what has been said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure within which it becomes healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of this that covers the incision due to the restlessness of the thigh and the flow of blood, then you should cover that the plague of the cot is submerged in the cold corrosive and lay it that which is corroded that comes from the gray, and attend to that which is within it that becomes healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	The text you provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	When a hole is made in the postern (a type of door) that leaves the titillus (a term for a small, thin piece of wood or metal used to hold something together), it is necessary
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	to cut the posterns that leave the titillus from the species of scrophulas, which are hard and contain a cell that is squeezed out.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	When some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture are likely to be unscarred after the lunar section of this figure: from line .G. to line .B. And as all is evacuated, you should complete the cut and leave the entrance open until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And when the cut is finished and is properly treated, enter if it is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the cut of the nodes' specimens and of the scrophulas is necessary, then you should make incisions over that area as has been said in the section on the scrophulas engulfment.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is extended to the part that is infected, then you should administer this cauterization after what has been said in the section on the plague.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of cuts that occur due to archery or the veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the bowstring breaks and the arrowhead is consolidated over it, wounds often occur at the site. And those who know that inflammation and wound are for the artery or vein: four, when the wound is for the archery, it is added to the pre-chest; and when the pain is felt in the wound by the thighs, you will hear in it that it is stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When that which is by vein is red in the manifestation of the body, it is called erysipelas.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	If the section on this appendage is incorrect, and especially in those that are left with the ankles, and the girdles, and the collar, and the most parts of the body; and it is large, then it is better that the cure be avoided, and that which is in the extramittents, or at the head, is also best avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Moreover, about that which is by them for inflammation of the orifice of the urethra, if the section is made in the abdomen, it is divided in the codon; and it is better to make the section uncut and to cut the urethra, and to open the tunics that are discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And put over that hole and make it penetrate into the other thigh, and stretch the urethra at two places, which causes you to have fissures in the extraction of multiple urethras that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And puncture the place that is between two ligaments and let it enter where it can reach all that is in it, and dissolve the appendage.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	When administering care in the quality that is necessary for those who have pain within their limbs; and this care is convenient to be done when it is necessary to heal.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If an abscess is caused by vein cutting, you should know that you have to hold it with your hand at the place where the abscess is, and insert the needle into the spot where you have held it, and let it penetrate; and it should be in the double fil that you extract the abscess from the other limb, and tie the abscess with the limb that you have told you in the limb of grape4 of two parts from the extremities of the fil.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you will extract the fil, then enter the needle into the hole where the abscess is, and remove all of the abscess from the first point of the needle, and tighten the ties in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Clean the abscess in the appropriate place when it is necessary to remove that which is inside, and if you see that there is excess fluid in the fil, then let that be removed from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over the sponge that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure that is made of calm and what is found within it to become healthy again.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitol L of apoplexy which occurs by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	How does apoplexy occur in the artery and vein, and it seems to occur apoplexy in the nerves when it occurs by their compression or by labor excessive, and apparently.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made the most of in the places of the helpers or the tailor, or in all the place where the joint pains are most.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And apoplexy is severe, and it resembles the color of another heart, and in the greater dispositions of their positions and when they are straight with vehemence, it seems to be amazed in the chest.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not apoplexy added in the first part of the heart, and then the girdle is placed, and it is much used to all parts and does not go to the parts behind or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who are in the joints do not cover that they are wrapped in iron, for very much the force will overcome the contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	When a person has pain in the head or forehead, it is called a headache.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the aposteme is small, then apply leathers to those parts and cut off the excess.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then remove that with a string, and cleanse it, and take it out; and adjust the thread to the suture, and care for that as it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 1.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of aposteme that occurs on the lip which occurs in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	And for those who have warts on the belly and in other parts of the body, and those which are similar to those in the belly, and those which are small and those which are great; and for those whose lips are conversant, and those which are little and those which are magnificent.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And if you have seen one and in the belly of that there were two which were less like warts and there was no difference between those white, of little substance.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	When the lips of those were turned inwards and were being made, and moisture ran throughout that entire time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then you closed them and made them firm in the other foot.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	In the operation of their insertion, it is considered labor if the thigh is moist, and the color of the flesh is white, moist, of a subtle nature; you close them with spatula, and they are in your presence, with cauteries in the fire, four watches required for the excision of the sanc, and if you find the sanc, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the thigh is swollen and trembling, keep away from the operation with iron; rather, labor to prepare recent points, and strengthen that hand, the one that has been spoken of; and rest it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And adjust in the stricture of the plum thread; therefore, do not stop strengthening the plum largely in the thigh, as long as it is separated and falls by its own weight.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	When a person has a large belly, if it is touched in the area, it causes fear and pain, and more so in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you cut off the gout of your patient, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	When that part is healed, apply this remedy.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	When you look at the object that is of dark color, with few sensations, with regular shape, and that is not made of iron, you should not presume to insert it into the body.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	When you come for rememberance of cranky bone.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol, line 2.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the eminent cure of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The eminence of the navel is caused by various motives; either by fissures of the umbilicus which lies over the abdomen and yields the intestine or hernia through which others rupture; or by congestion of veins or arteries as it is said, or by narrowing of the vein.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is by a fissure of the umbilicus and by the yielding of the intestine, the color of the gangrene resembles that of the chest; and it is called leon's pain, and appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by the exit of the hernia, you should know its situation as that which has been found, with less diversity in vehemence, and when you prescribe that to the tympanites you hide it, and then returns; and more is needed for it, and you must enter the abdomen and work vehemently.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	When it is caused by cold humors, it is called gout. It does not hide itself when the first pain is felt, nor is it tightened, nor is it contracted.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to sin, these symptoms appear as black deformities.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	When it is caused by flesh, the gout is heavy, thick, and hard, and remains fixed after a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	When it is due to venery, the gout touches the flesh of the leon.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The operation in it is that you consider it sinful if the umbilic eminence is due to sin of arc or vein, or from venery; you know that it is prohibited for the cure of the leon, as there is fear and no one knows how to treat it in the capital where I have mentioned the gout due to arc and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the eminence of the umbilic is due to the intestine or the belly, you know that you must command the patient to hold it tight and extend it; and approach the circuit of the entire umbilic, and command the one who was on the opposite side between your thighs over the testicle, and encircle it with spatula in the circuit of the umbilic over the place you have seen with the testicle; and extend the width of the gout to the parts of it as much as possible; and join or separate and close the manicure of the leon's belly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And so you extend the ligament over the tendon and insert the needle into that point to push the intestine; and if you have not tightened or held it with the ligament, then you pull it out and pull the intestine to the parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have tightened the cloth, then hold that arm up; and insert the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your arch or vein, then surround that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them into those two holes and enter the needles into the circuit that you have made around the tendon in the hand of the crotch, which threads pass; and tighten the tendon on four points over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place where it is soft and falls down by itself; or insert it when it is subtle and becomes soft, and care for that arm as much as possible that covers the incisions within which it is healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence of the navel is of flesh or humor, then cover that you conquave the tendon as we have said and disturb the sanctity or humidity that atrobes in it, and care for that arm as much as possible that covers and consolidates the place.
Capitol .liii.	The first source sentence is not provided in the given text. However, I can
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of a sprain.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	The first source sentence can be translated as:
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	When the ancients made incisions on certain parts of the body where possible eradication of the disease could be achieved, they would cut as close to the breastbone or thigh as possible, and more so when beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When the ancients were more skilled and knowledgeable, it does not mean that you are able to cure this disease or have seen another, nor that this has been passed down to us.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation on this is when it is allocated as has been said, because you descend and the patient's legs are purged of black vomit some viscera, and it is noticed that this is the case if it becomes gangrenous with manifest anger.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient by the preparation in which it is located for the operation, and prohibit certain things that could harm this; and carefully examine all parts of the body to perform a thorough examination within which no cause of the disease's effects is found.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And run the sand, and do not leave that place empty, and extract the parts, and remove the sand as much as possible from both your hands or from the instrument you can most easily from the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have any opposition to the enlargement of a vein or an artery, then cauterize it at the point where the blood flow ceases, and proceed with that in another cure where it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capitol .liv. is a Latin abbreviation that means
De curacio de ydropici.	De curacio de yropici is a Latin phrase that means "of the cure
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de yropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas. translates to "We have already recommended, in the division, of the waters of yropici from the water, and the instructions for each species, of the cure by the physician.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal. translates to "And that which is cured by iron is not the species of althitas alone, and it is not near the species of timpanistres nor the species of yposarcha, which is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autr
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you ever see the beautiful thigh of an exuberant woman, and it is not another part of her body but only her buttocks, and neither young nor old, then the man who performs the operation on her lifts her thigh with your hands, and ministers to her stomach with the back of his hand, pressing the water to the end of the penis, and presses spines in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be two sharp points, of sharp extinction like spines; but rather, it may be slightly short in small parts, so that in the operation it does not pass into the bowel, and that you can see that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of hydrocystic is from the bowels, and that you hold that I cut through the umbilicus for the quantity of three fingers' width on either side, on the right over the penis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydrocystic is from the exuberant thigh, your cut should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three fingers' width.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation of the child is through the table, then your incision should be on the left side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side that you want to cut the thigh for, as this would cause excessive bleeding in that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And perforate the instrument throughout the codon, and insert it into that incision, and lift your hand from the codon and the siphac, and remove that; and if the quantity of a ungla or envir.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And perforate the siphac when the spumon reaches the location you want, and that is the place for the urine.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a silver canula; it is made of silver, or iron, or gold, at the point where there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two of one part and one of another part; and it is the end of the incision according to the pen of the feather, as many times as possible.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	When the knife is withdrawn from the abdomen, it should be placed on the patient's belly, then gently press down on the knife, so that the water escapes in that direction, which if you pull out without covering the abdomen, then the body will resolve the spirit animal's problem, or may end up with five punctures near death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Then remove the water in the second amount of virtue from the patient, and according to what you understand about the dispositions of the body's virtue and the beauty of the leg and the goodness of the leg, then.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And when you withdraw the instrument, and release the water that causes it, then hold on to the water that is held by the belt that holds the codpiece of that member which you are recommended to press with your hand.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the instrument on another day as many times as the body tolerates it, and remove a small amount of water each time, and keep doing this for several days, and be careful not to let the water come out except for a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear the anus, and there is a great amount of water in it, then you should bury that part in sand, moisten it with oil, and let it be exposed to the sun for a long time; and cure that part with desiccating medicines when it is dry.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply cauterization on the stomach, and the mess is made according to how you have heard it should be done.
Capitol .lv.	Capital of Latvia.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Regarding the cure of children who were born without a hole in their urinary tract.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are vomiting from their stomach, and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or is straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, a pointed cauterization can be made to perforate the throat as much as possible, according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	 And pause in the throat with a subtle pointed nail and tie it, and either for three days or for twelve hours.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the urine is hard and cloudy, and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not hold onto the plummet, it is possible that the urine that will be over this spot may not follow this rule.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Is that which is struck with the plummet, if it is treated with the clavi of Plomo, as they have said, for several days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Are those in which the plummet is not in its place, it is led out, the cause of which is that one must raise the head of the vagina so that it cannot urinate in the parts below; and this generation is not due to the fact that the sperm does not reach the higher part of the uterus, and it is a bad sign.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the maneuver of the operation on it is that the thigh be covered over the right side, and extend the head of the vagina to your left hand with a strong extraction, and insert the cap of the vagina of the location of the periurethra am sand, as if it were written with a pen, or that you do not know any part, so that the appearance of the cap of the vagina is similar to the head of the vagina and the plummet falls in its place subsequently that it covers.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	You should pay attention to the first four movements that may occur in your surgical operation for the flow of sweat; and stop at this point where you cut the sweat, and care for the wound inside if it is cured.
Capitol .lvi.	This appears to be a Roman numeral, which corresponds to the number 6
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	In the prepuce of the penis, near the root of the glans and corpora cavernosa, and adhesion of the prepuce of the glans, there may occur.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Visible movements may occur in this prepuce of the penis, and it is characterized by fat tissue.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, but rather suspends under the skin and cuts that part inside which is entirely covered; and then places the hand over the edge of the wound in Egyptian fashion; and that one, cares for the wound daily until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the prepuce is malignant, of dark color, then you should cover that part with cauterization and the root of the penis.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the prepuce of the penis is not circumcised and one part of the prepuce is cut off and the other part is left intact, then you should cover that part with skin that was cut at the beginning, and when you cure the other part, make sure it is not torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if there are already galls and black spots on the genitals and prepuce, then cover everything that has already been damaged or is about to be corrupted or corrupted, and put a dough made of flour, milk, and eggs on it, which has been crushed with a mortar and pestle.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And when you cure that part, do so within the other cure when it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If the flow of blood is stopped, then administer cauterization in this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Cauterization is applied in two ways to the body, once for stopping the flow of blood and the other for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is rotten and destroyed completely at that time, then cover that you introduce into the meat of the prepuce a catheter made of plastic for that urine passes through it for that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the foreskin to the tip of the penis (and this attachment only occurs in the one where the foreskin is, and not over it; and when it occurs attachment by sore or by abscess) you should exert pressure on the swollen part with your thumb, as soon as the cord has been dissolved and the tip of the penis has been separated from all parts.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to determine those exquisitely, you should know that you are pressing on some cause of the tip of the penis and the foreskin, and thus, if the foreskin is thin, it will be perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And separate the foreskin from the tip of the penis by a thin part, which is already wet in the water so that it does not adhere to another surface.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And your care should be to stretch it after it has been consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 7.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the education of children and the care of what occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuous infections as with other plagues: but rather, when it is our operation and our will, and it is intended for children, it is necessary to assign it to the better operation and let the fewer ones be lost for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Thus, it is stated that the ancients did not perform circumcision on all parts of the body that were free, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because they have acquired by experience that the major part of artificers and barbers use circumcision and washing for cleaning and hygiene is no longer needed; and they use false lips and sewn lips.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already prohibited all these methods and did not improve washing for artificers, false lips, and sewn lips that in washing are as uncomfortable as the ungla, where the codena pus is hidden, where the codena of the prepuce has two layers, and Roman the tonica pus further, and very much it is difficult for another inscizio and pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the washing which is done by alphecati, and is digital, of which they use the shears, is not safe for the inscizio of the end of the male member, where very much it is difficult to enter in the wound of the member.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation of the ungla, very much you should use iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	When the child's codpiece is short by nature, and there are no visible signs of it that require circumcision, and you have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But the forfex is not too sharp or thin, as I have seen described by others, rather it is proportional to the size of the acumen that follows, and thus the acumen that you press with your proportioned two acumens, and inscribes a comparison in a time; and the compression of the foreskin contains the codpiece of the scrotum of the entire part, which does not make any mistake of all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The method of the first operation is that you make the child stay more comfortable if it is of those that I understand to be small, which you only do by stretching the foreskin over the codpiece as much as possible, and making it enter another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And make that pleasure spread throughout the entirety of that method that you are capable of receiving your intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And make that stay between your most prepared statues, and not be a cause of discomfort; and hide the forfexes in your hand or on the child's thigh, which the child will not see those or other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And place your hand on the patient's thigh and breathe into their mouth, and remove that which is causing the tightening of the neck of the verge, and modify that which is added to it in the case of deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And tie the knot at the marked location, and tie a small second knot with a thread, and tie it to the same point as before for good retention, and insert between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And raise the codena over the limb and tie the cap of the verge; and cut the thread small by small, as best you can; and sprinkle some powder over it and on the powder sprinkle some olive oil recent bo; and place that over that within another day; and care for that with curative treatment within what is healthy.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the modifications in the hand, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some are extra-thight and others are tight, so as not to be too tight of the lock, and as the length of the acute angles is like the length of two manubs engagement.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	When there is an error in the world's formation, it is often that you escape the inner code entirely, or part of it, because of the inscription.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should extend that part of your body to the side where it hurts and lie down on your back with that second equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your own hand, then take it out of the wound and place it on another part of your body.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days and the swelling has subsided on one side of the abdomen, then you should enter as soon as possible to remove the abscess cautery, exfoliate that part, and lay down on your other side prepared for it.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep the head of the swelling away from it, so it will not be affected by this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And cure that part which is inflamed with the powders that were recommended in the treatment of the powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it is placed on the abdomen according to measure and follows the divisions, then you will not notice it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And cure that part which they have said should be treated when it is healthy.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 88.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	When there is retention of urine in the bladder, it is caused by swelling or hardening due to pebbles or sand, or by inflammation or scarring, and it resembles the symptoms described for the hands in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved and you see retention of the urine due to a stone in the urethra, then cover the buttocks with cloths.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that patient over the buttocks and extend the abdomen from the side of the foot to the opposite side, and the intestine stretches as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then you press the urethral opening with the stone to expel it from the rear parts, so that the urine is completely discharged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If the urine is not dissolved and you have severe pain in the abdomen, then cover the abdomen with cloths. Then administer an extracomfort to the urethra using a syringe, of which this is the form: It is of silver and subtle lion, with a subtle canal of the penis, similar to a palm and finger, in which there is a subtle canal at the top of the head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to expel urine from that patient is to take the doubled finger and lie it on the hair or beard for good grooming; and insert the extractions of the finger in the rear part of the thigh, and if there are any causes of the hair in the forfexes, then introduce it in the canula with vehemence and apply it to the border and album of the hou.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	When the patient lies on their stomach, and the physician gently touches their genitals and private parts, using olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then the physician enters the anus with ease, if it is easy to do so; and bends the anus towards the belly; and presses the cirena into that; and presses that into the anus as it comes to the vagina, and the vagina should be entered in this order, not in another, for it may cause harm.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually extend the penis through the small hole, until the urine comes out through the small hole.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Extract that and use it for urinary catheterization, and do not stop until you have done so and use the cirena after the bladder has been emptied and the uterus has been relieved of pressure.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 17.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	The quality of the catheterization of the bladder is clamped and the instruments that are suitable for this are closed.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the vesica, or is suppurating in it, or there is a gaping wound, and you wish to distill water and medicines into that, then use the instrument called a clamp as follows:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	However, if the opening of the ulcer is narrow, it should be closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that case there are three ways: two from one side, as many times as necessary.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is located in the following manner: where there is flesh, and as much as it can be pulled out, and then when any cause causes that tissue to be drawn away from the wound, it is also drawn away, and when it is expelled, it is as if a clamp has been used on it, which presses naphtha into the battlefields of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you wish to prevent moisture from entering the vesica, insert the end of the clamp into the moisture, and draw out that water which is expelled from the parts on either side, four times the amount of water is drawn out in the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	When the protrusion of the clap is entered into the groin as recommended in the circumference; and when that humidity is pressed, four times as much pressure is applied to the vagina, and the thighs are placed at right angles.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the cervix that is being stretched, and that form is:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	If it is made of silver or gold, of which the tip appears to be like a small quill, and the handle is made of ivory.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then hold the vagina tightly, and pause in that humidity you want to stretch in the vagina, and place it between two fingers of the double hand, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then enter the end of the stretched vagina into the groin.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then stretch your hand over the vagina with the humidity that has been stretched inside the thigh that already has the humidity that has been permeated in the vagina.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a vagina, then take a silk ball and press on that circle; and pierce through the entire circumference; and enter the fingers as far as they can go in those tracks, so that it is stretched; and add the circle so that it is added alsofatur, and you will pause in that amount of humidity that you want to have, and oil and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And you should fasten that with the instrument and make it as tight as you made it in the vagina, and express the fluid from your own body within, but if moisture penetrates into the vagina.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol LX.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the specifics of urinary stones and their treatment with medicinal drugs, and the difference between those that are generated in the urethra and those that are generated in the vagina, and the symptoms of those.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And it has been said which stone I removed from you with operation and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the vagina is that which remains in the vagina.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you should relate this to the manifest exposure and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, say that the stones generated in the vagina mainly affect the child; and from those symptoms it is understood that the urine that is excreted from the urethra is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the thighs are affected by their genitals, and the buttocks are swollen, and they are dressed; and at that time the anus is exposed to those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	It is the duty of the physician to care for the children who have reached fourteen years of age, and it is difficult to treat elderly people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	When young people are affected by this disease, it is more common in women.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which causes the urinary bladder to be larger and the cure to be longer; And if it is fewer, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And when you reach the cure of that, first examine the thighs of the patient, and remove any obstructions that may be in the intestines; then the fenestra can be closed with a needle, and the urethra must be inspected for any obstructions.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And if it is near the thighs of the patient and is compact and moist, then the urethra must be inspected for any obstructions, whether the urine descends to the top of the vesica or leaps from one place to another.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And make that point as close to the patient's thighs as possible, and leave the rest of the thighs open, so that the entire urethra is exposed to the parts outside.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And make sure that it and the entire urethra are exposed.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the urine in the space, then you should cut as much as possible around it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If no part of the thigh is touched, then you should cover that with oil if the left side of the body is affected, or with that specific cream if it is a child, or with the appropriate medicine if it is an adult, and insert it into the anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And when the bladder is placed in front of the thigh.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert it little by little into the back of the vagina.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then place something over that, and expel it into the desired parts of the vagina, where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the midwife to press on the vagina with her hand; and command another midwife to extend the fingers of her right hand to the desired parts of the vagina, and hold the clamp that is left in the location where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And insert a sponge that has been soaked in the appropriate liquid, which is this:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Then cut it in the space between the anus and the labia, not in the middle, rather near the left thigh; and let the incision be on the bladder and the thigh be in the anus, and make it a transverse incision so that the incision is wide and does not tear the vagina according to the amount of the bladder that can be cut from the possible, and not more, for if the bladder in the anus is cut, the vagina will forget its defect.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You know that from the stone, there is one that has an angle and borders, for which the increase of its size is difficult by this means.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And after reducing the abdomen or hernia to its
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if it is that which has sharp angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If there is no mistake made, you should cover that part with something, or grasp it gently in a proper manner, the end of which is where you grasp the foot, and do not let go; or you can insert the subtle instrument of curved end further.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do so on that part, then increase the thickness of the thread slightly, and if you see blood flowing out, tighten it further with that which has been melted in vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the foot is less than a, then at the beginning you push it into the mouth of the vesica and place it over there; and then push a small one in; and if it seems to have fewer strokes than before.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the foot is very large, then ignorance is that you insert that part very deeply, and one of two things may happen: either it remains or becomes inflamed due to the continuous distillation of urine, so that the place is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If the expulsion is not complete, then do not forget to cover that part with something, or grasp it gently in a proper manner, the end of which is where you grasp the foot, and do not let go; or you can insert the subtle instrument of curved end further.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	When you have completed your operation, fill the wound with gauze and apply a poultice of aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	Then place oil on that dressing and either red or rose oil, and apply it to the wound so that the poultice may be absorbed.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then raise the patient's leg over the edge of the bed, and do not let it slide down the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When that has slid down, clean the area with water and oil, and apply it daily until it is completely healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound you see discharge and corrosion, and it appears as if the drug has melted into the vesicle, and for that reason the prohibited ointment (and this is known by the excretion of the drug from the urine) should be removed from that wound and the drug extracted, then if it causes the vesicle to corrode and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and apply it in opposite direction to all parts, and that which is most suitable for the cure when it is completely healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	When you have covered all the hours of the cure, and you lie down with your thighs spread apart and adjust the medicines that were placed on the spot.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and is in the meat of the bladder, and it gets stuck there, and the amount of urine is prohibited, then you should cure this as I recommend so that you can reach sectioning; and too many cases have been reported for this cure and are accused of sectioning; and you have already done this, and it is this form of the perforator:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extrusion, sharp, stuck in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And take care to hold it firmly, and then remove the stone from the bladder so that it does not return to the urethra.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And enter the iron into the bladder, easily perforating if that perforator comes to that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And roll the perforator in your hand and in that small stone little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it as you push it from another part to penetrate; and the urine is completely eliminated.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	When you press your hand on that part of the skin which is behind the groin, where it is swollen, and it is forgotten by the urine, and the thigh becomes healthy.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not suitable for you due to any cause that prohibits it, then place a cushion under the skin, and another under the skin.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And close over the skin in that groin between two openings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And remove the liment and modify the scarred sinus, which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to remove the liment from the skin, but because it does not return to the vesicle, and the other liment is also not used, when the fiel is slipped from the edge of the skin, the codena returns to its place and draws the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this you need when you have the fiel slipped, that you raise the codena to the parts behind it, or that you return the best part, and draw the wound with what has been said.
Capitol .lxi.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided seems to be a
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Here's the translation of the line you provided: "Extraction of gravel from the thighs.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	When pain is experienced in the female genital area, it is called "peyra" and is of little birth.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see any urine in any of those, the cure of the patient is difficult and it is forbidden by strong hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	When the female has a strong desire.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a female who is wise enough to tell the doctor when she is given to a man, or is of the women who have not been trained.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not know this art, especially the operation of the male organ.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision on the female's clitoris is longer than the location of the clitoris, so it requires a larger excision, and in that case there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If you need to do this, then know that you take a wise woman, and it is not difficult.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are not private about this, then know that you take a subtle woman or a mature woman, or a woman who is in this art and has left the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore make this presentation and command the one who does everything that you order him, from the investigation of the clitoris to the beginning; which causes it to look if the female has a desire, know that you put the thing you want in the ass of the man and want the clitoris.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If that gout becomes severe, cauterize that part with the pointed cautery and command the doctor to place it on that spot.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not visible, command the midwife to insert the instrument into the patient's cavity and examine the uterus, keeping her left hand on the bladder, and compress that part well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If that gout becomes severe, I advise you to gradually remove the instrument from the bladder's opening, dividing it into parts as you proceed until you reach the end of the vagina.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And place the pointed cautery on the specified point of the patient's vagina, dividing it into parts as you proceed until you reach the end of the uterus and center the bladder in that part, and the doctor will say that it is not causing any pain.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the uterus, command to adjust the incision according to the amount you know that the uterus is getting swollen from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You are aware that the species of pebbles are movements: four of those are few and large, and rough and harsh, and long and round, and have sharp points.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many species there are of pebbles that you signify about the same thing that you want to speak about.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to remove a stone, adjust in the glass made and hold it for an hour until the stone is detached, and then return to your operation when the stone is outside.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare as many instruments as you can for the removal of stones in men, so that you can help those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to remove a stone, and know that the expulsion of the stone is from the urethra that is inscribed, then you pause powder over the place and stretch it with the powder and stricture descent, and do not iterate this; and leave the stone and do not extract that, for fear that the patient will die of the disease.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And cure the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the acuity of the pain becomes appropriate to the joints, and the place is soaked, then return to your operation when the stone is outside the body.
Capitol lxii.	Capitulum LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Chapter on incision for hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not but an addition of moisture in the white gut, which is left with the cord of the genitals containing the seed, and it is called a hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And if some worms are in the proper fascia of which the nature is prepared in the part where there is another egg; and the cord of the genitals is between the white gut which I have spoken of, and it is not until then that it is known as a hernia.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is by debauchery which happens to the genitals, because it is spread among them, and some worms happen by hitting over the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has different colors, either the color of it is yellow or it becomes pale red, or brown, or black putrefaction, or white slimy, and it is known that it increases.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	When the joints are cleaned by these means, this addition of water is done on this: four if it is in the white cube that has been said, then the abscess is cleaned and a small piece of cloth is left hanging down from the tip of the toe, and the genitals are exposed, so that moisture covers the entire part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in its proper place, then the abscess is cleaned and a small piece of cloth is left hanging down from the tip of the toe, and another person estimates that there is another abscess.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the moisture is between the genitals and the white cube, then you should leave the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	To determine the color of the moisture, spread the color of the moisture on the abscess in the cotton that is placed inside the hollow; and then, according to what is seen in the fold of the cotton, judge from there what it should be.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when you come to the care of the iron, you should cover the command at the thigh that it is a fleebottom if it is possible, and sometimes the cost of the ple.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	When the patient is lying on their back with their legs apart for a short time, and then pauses the motion of the legs.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then place your hand on the left side of the patient, and command the servant to stand on the right side of the patient, who extends their arm from the hip to the two lats of the chest and the navel of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take some salt and divide the chest muscles of the lower abdomen by the length within a certain number of inches.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	If the cut is made according to the correct line of the abdominal muscles, and it reaches the white bone called the coxal bone.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	Then remove it and observe, and keep this in mind so that you do not reinsert it; and your excavation is the one that you excavate from the part that is suspended by the hand and carefully scrutinize the excavation according to the amount you can possibly do.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then perforate the coxal bone with a wide hole and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision from the uncinate bone, and extend the scissors to the parts below; and do not touch the coda with the genitals comprehending, and insert the scissors into the manicure that is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert it into the whole or into the testicles, and most of the subtle one, if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, it is not guaranteed that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the woman undergoes the operation of her coda at the time of your operation, when you have closed the incision of the scissors, return to that, and adjust the two lips of the coda of the genitals with the sutura, and treat that wound as the others, if it is healthy.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the woman is corrupted by another malady, know that you lie the veins which are so much in the suspensory, and remove the woman, and treat that as they have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in doas parts equal, know that the doas are the ernias; therefore, insert it in the part that you have made in the other engualment; and if you see that it is an operation, then you make it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should try to remove the sac, and enter into the submerged wool with oil or rose oil; and place another wool on top of that which you have submerged in oil and rose oil, and expand it over two guttae and the miracle of the stomach; and fold over the pleats and powders, and lay them on those that follow this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	When the patient's thighs are open and cushioned with cloth, and their hands are held together; and their feet are made tight at the ends with a knife or damp cloth, and the strain is applied to the sheath of the tendons, and one end is inserted into the other, and the other end is held at the pantile, and two extra strains are applied over two thighs and two ankle straps, and all the strain is adjusted in the sheath of the tendons.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, this hernia is medically treated with cauterization instead of sectioning with a knife; and it is that you grasp the cauterizing needle subtly and insert it into the ring of the guttaverses, and ignite afterwards if they have advised to enter within where the white cyst containing water is found, and then you hold the cauterizing needle in this way:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is assembled like Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then the hernia is pierced in that cyst, and it is ignited when all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And if you want to enlarge the incision, and scrape it, and scrape the cauterization subtly ignited; and insert the second one that is possible for you to enter when you have eliminated all of it; and keep away from the fire that does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	You know that this operation is safer and longer lasting than sectioning.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you have an objection to using a cautery at the time of sectioning or cauterization, or during the operation, remember that this objection is for your own good, and I will treat the one that is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is afraid, and does not hope for the second operation because of its horror, then you should administer perforation according to what I recommend; and when you are certain that you must, for what has been said about the meanings, that this hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Remember that you must cut the patient on any raised place, and then perforate the cautery in the low part of the belly, and stop the perforation when you reach the length of the coat.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	If the wound is wide open, it will completely drain the poison.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the incision site and press it down firmly, to prevent more poison from entering.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And cure that inside as soon as the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	However, if contrariety is to the good of the poison at that time, and you perforate it: and this is not done but for this reason that the white pancreas in the orifice of the plague makes contrariety and prohibits the accumulation of poison, then you must either put in the plague penny or instrument of which the gold is extracted from the gallbladders, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the oppression of the plague a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the poison returns, and it is aguegua for about six months or longer; and when it is added, you must perforate it secondly after that manual maneuver, so that the thigh passes through those days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	When it comes to cutting on a hernia of the flesh and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You should know that in the section about this hernia, there is fear of harm to the larger parts; because I have seen the release of this one and it was saved for the better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	When you remember the operation in that and the specifics of the posts.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Then, say that the posts are born in those whose genitals are conjointed and is called gout by hot causes: either by sudden coldness which is dissolved in the genitals, or by puncture.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And it is the color of the post that corresponds to the color of the body, and it does not become pale in that pain, and it is a heavy post.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very much the post is papillated, of which the color is dark, and it does not have a smell at that.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some points are made by nodalization of the arteries, and by inflammation of those veins which are already known by the memory of the patient, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But it is known that this is due to inflammation of the arteries because the post spreads when you press on that with your hands; and it does not touch that.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But what is made by inflammation of the veins is not dispersed by any cause that you compress with your hands.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	When it is possible that this special section is a cut and on the other parts; and that you insert the code of the genitals, and stretch the erection to the parts thereof, and extract that from the white cipher, and untie the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensory that you untied from the entire part of the parts of the erection.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the erection has already been well consolidated in those fleshy parts, you should know that you extract the erection and insert it there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if adhesion occurs between any cause of the white cipher or between that which is between the thighs, you should know that you untie all that adhesion and insert it there by means of a round insertion.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the part where the adhesion occurs is of flesh, you should know that you insert all that thereof and extract the erection as has been said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When your operation is completed, you should fill the hole with white thread on red oil and see; and take care of that as for another cure which is made when it is healthy.
Capitol .lxiv.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in Lat
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	From the cure of a hernia that is from the gut.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	When an inflammation is wrapped around by some wrapping that seems like a softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move and walk on the thighs.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this condition, there is fear of that which precedes the rememoration.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we will speak of operation in the second part, which was done in the first part.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And say that the thighs are to be placed on an elevated bed; and raise the suspensory of the testicles to the parts further away; and tie the codpiece of the genitals to the threads that you see on the girdle, and hold onto those other servants that you have, and extend them as far as possible.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert an iron needle through the hard part in transverse section on the right side of the thighs when they are discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove all parts that you have said in the extraction of an artery, which are in the templates.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert an arrowhead in which there is a double gutter, and tie it to the first of the places where the inflammation occurs, and tie it to the other one that is seen at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	When you have inserted the knife into the long side of the thigh, and extracted that which is added with the humors that are fetid and corrupted.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then, carefully remove the disease from the other diseases in which you want to be born because of those that do not have two generations, which is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If you happen to hit all the balls, it is clear that the testicles are extruded or that the testicles for this reason are in harmony with the vessels, so that they are privileged of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they are established, or that they are due to such a reason that they are not young in those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of inguinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by incision that ends in the scrotum extended over the abdomen from the anus of the mirror of the belly, so that the intestines of that rupture are at the end of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This rupture is either of the cecum or of the gallbladder, and happens due to certain causes: either by blows, or by pricking, or by noise, or by lifting any heavy object, or by seemings.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The symptom of this is, when it extends to the cecum, that it happens little by little over a long time and not suddenly, and it causes abdominal pain to enter through the intestine as the cecum constricts the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The symptom of this is when it extends to the cecum, that at first it causes severe pain suddenly; and it appears different from the usual appearance further down the spine, and this is due to engorgement of the intestine, and the cause of this is the cecum's interference with the joints of the cecum.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Sometimes the intestine is forgotten by the bowel wall, and this is called an intestinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some are made by vomiting, and some are found in the bowel fold, and here they are held, and there is great pain in the abdomen, and some cause more severe pain and greater discomfort when moved.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of the spices of this disease, iron is feared, because it is believed that it must be avoided in that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The first source sentence to translate:
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	When it comes to the ribbon that covers the male organ, and inserts it into the body, and closes it completely along its length; and then fixes one lip of the incision on the other side as indicated by the doctor to close the incision for those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If the incision is made according to the quantity that you are able to remember that of that it will be lost.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And remove those patches that are left on the covering of the male organ, entering if the white circular patch of any part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then enter the said point in this way that it comes to the testicle, in this way that it is between the white circle, which is left on the covering of the organ, and then between the other white circle, and release the adhesion that is in the part behind the organ.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if you can, cover the male organ with the ribbon on the edges, and extend the white circle to its left, and raise the organ with the ribbon to the incision; and command the minister to extend it and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind in the completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When asked if there is any cause for the intestine being wrapped around the white bone, they say no.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you suspect that it has any cause, then you should examine it on the inside of the belly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle of the same size as the largest knot, and enter it into the flesh of that part, and go through the bone of the pelvis, which is below the stomach, and cut it; and then insert the ends of the four strings that come out at the other end of the knot, and lay them over some figure on the crotch; and let him say that the pelvis is the one from which the stomach comes out, which is fortunate for two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the ends of the strings and say that they are fortunate for two parts, which is vehemently entrusted to the belly that does not have any cause for it to happen here, as it may lead to gangrene cauterization.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Then pause another limb for the second one, after three minutes; and these two limbs should be from the pelvis that has the stomach below the belly, which is according to the size of the first, and insert all the remaining parts in the same roundness, and take it away from you.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And if you proceed to the point on the side of the abdomen of the testicles by cutting through the which runs around and is full of sin and sickness as they have advised in this that they have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And apply wool dipped in oil and rest on the plague; and apply the ligament that they have recommended (and some of the white bladder is cauterized, which they said about the incision of the gallbladder, where five motas veguadas happen to those) and tighten the ligament so that it does not fall.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the pain of the gallbladder is delayed, apply cold water to the tail and rest on it as they have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And cure the plague with another cure of the plagues within which is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of a ventouse hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia it has not been seen that it was being operated on during the treatment of the patient with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing that was done was to do what they have recommended in the hernia that you have; the which is to cut through the which is easy to do for the patient; and to dry in the middle of the area in environment the apostema that I have ordered this, within which if the vayssels come out.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	When the plague has been treated according to what has been said, and it is known that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Capitol, LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the deformity that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some have observed ruptures in the ankles as has been said, and have removed the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not cause any harm to the intestines in the body; and if they do, it is very little; and then return to normal in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged, a fissure is made in the gallbladder as it places the intestine in the gallbladder; and this causes the gallbladder to extend in the ankle as has been said, which causes the gallbladder to stretch, and then it becomes soft and the location from which it was extracted disappears.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of the gallbladder is by cauterization as has been said, preceded by the narrative of the gallbladder.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some have been cured of the gallbladder by ferrum according to this method: and it is that the ankle covers the inside of the thigh with your own hands, and removes the location of the emerging intestines by cutting them in half according to the degree of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tightly hold the white key that is inside the lock that has been discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then hold the thumb and place it over the prominent part of the key, and press that on the stomach.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then hold down the other prominent parts of the thumb with the fingers, and adjust one of them to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the thumb, and do not inscribe the key of the cipher completely, nor extend the hole, nor another cause as you will know in the treatment of hernial enterocele.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that as in the treatment of diseases, and when you inscribe the fields, cleanse that and restore the disease inside that which is consolidated; for the key contracts and does not adjust the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, where it is properly used for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol, Chapter 88.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the lock of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Observing the lock of the testicles in healthy men is softened by hormones that make the tissues around it soft, and adjusts the gaze.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When it is necessary to examine the patient who is lying on their side for the treatment of the knee, and to cover the entire leg that has been softened over the natural knee; and then to adjust the pillow as needed at the sutures.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, in the beginning, the excess of the softened leg is divided into three or four parts and is fixed with sutures.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And insert between the sutures; and then cure for the cure of other diseases that come when it is healthy and cause the wounds.
Capitol .lxix.	Capital. LXVIX.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is prohibited in our law, and this is because of the reason that I remember it in this free book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for the hands, of which one is in the knowledge of the doctor when he is buried in that, which knows the cure of the animal that happens to it; and the other hand is that we have need of castration of other animals for our pleasures, as with horses, and mouths, and pigs, and for the purpose of resemblance to the animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting or by making a slit.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration done by cutting, the way of the operation is that we make a cut along the animal's tail, entering it between those parts that are soft and thin and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And hold those parts in your hand inside where they are loose and do not show the touch from now on.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In the case of castration done by making a slit and cutting, you will have the animal and press the coja of the testicles of the other side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And tie the suspensors, and insert them over each hole that is made by one cut.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And insert those plugs that will have excorged.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not put anything over those of the cipher that is not the subtle cipher that is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better than the one that is done by cutting, for when cutting is too hard, it causes some cause in the testicles so that the animal wants to cry.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And when the plague is cured that it has entered,
Capitol .lxx.	The first source sentence is "Capitol .lxx." which translates
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure for gout.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is second to two hands: one is called or appears as if it were the space between the testicles, in which a fourth female part appears in the quality of which it is made.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some people see signs of urine in that space which is in the testicles' cavity.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, there is a special case: it is that which is on the pubis is like two testicles of a man, a part of the penis, and a part of the clitoris, all together.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: from two men and one kind of women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it seems that you have inserted those tight ones between the thighs when you escaped from the pain of that, and that you cure those other plagues with the same care.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, where urine is found in the space between the testicles, there is no care or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lengthening and of embellishing because of the causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	When a rash is caused by natural causes that emerge and spread with the examination, and some are magnified in some women as much as in men and even more during sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you have the excess of scratching at your own or another's rash and inserting your fingers.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not stop in the insertion, mainly at the root of the rash, so that you do not cause inflammation.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then care for it as is cured by the diseases when it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The most horrible wound is flesh that is filled with blood when it is pierced, and it is often scratched in the same places as the cauda (and for this reason they are called "cauda malautia"); therefore, do not insert your fingers as you scratch, and cure it when it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capital xxii.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of leprosy.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Leprosy is that which does not occur in the woman, or if it does, it is very small.
E es o natural o accidental.	When it is natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	It is accidental due to the disease that preceded it, or it is caused by an unadjusted skin or a subtle and sparse hair.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is felt or in the prepuce, or on the sides of it, or on the root of it, or on the base of it, and forbids copulation and emission and embryosis, and forbids menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The cause of that pain is known by observing the menstrual cycle, if the prolapse is evident, it is appropriate; but if it is not evident, you should carefully examine that with the vagina or with the finger.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the prolapse is due to a subtle hair, and it is proper for the lips of the vulva, you should cut and disromp that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you place over the lips of the vulva powders, and place a pause on the vaginal opening to prevent excessive moisture from entering.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be over the bed, with the thighs extended, and extend the lips of the vulva as far as that subtle hair is broken and the prolapse is healed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And take some wool and anoint it with oil and place it on that spot over there, and wrap it around so that that place is not yet solidified.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the hernia is large and thick, you should cover that with either sand or marshmallow root.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the incision is carnified, you should suspend that point with a needle and close it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if they ask you for medicines that stop the flow of your menstrual bleeding, give them this: white oak bark, ginger, and wormwood, adjusted to the size of the albuminous liquid.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And administer a large-bore catheter so that the plague does not solidify too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold that for as long as possible and administer saline solution.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And when it is cured, return to the other treatment for consolidation once it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents happen in the more distant regions of other countries, and you should cover that with this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .lxxiii.	This appears to be a page number or section header, not a translation. It indicates that
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Regarding the cure of hemorrhoids and of red blotches that occur in the vagina.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated more than the openings of veins that continually bleed, and they are also older and more common.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and the symptoms of those, and I will tell you which of those receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and pains occur when they are in the vagina and do not appear at the beginning, and there is no treatment for them.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Moreover, those that are in the vagina over which they feel a sensation, are those that have been treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover the woman with enough heat and extend her legs under the sheets or over a pillow, and insert them into those parts.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And if you need to grind on those ducts of the sinews of one of those incorrigible powders, it is necessary to do it with care and precision, as it is said to them.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And massage the patient's feet for an hour, and then take it in warm water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the sinews are persistent, then make that powder with some sumac, some corns of wheat, and some honey, and a little of something else.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And if you need to make dough from oats and honey, then agree and make a plaster with it on the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the sinew is separated, so be it; and if not, then make it stick with two ventouses, and on its scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to take wool and submerge it with some sugar of colin or sugar of angel or sugar of guarriguez, then apply it to the wound; and after, care for the wound until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the Lord help you to understand what I mean by this harsh observation, since I speak in English, which is not your mother tongue.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When you enter the room, take care that it is clean and sanitary.
Capitol .lxxiv.	This appears to be a reference or citation, but without additional context, it's difficult
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	When there is an accidental puncture in the largest vein.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Specific types of wounds that can occur in the largest vein include cuts, ulcers, abscesses, eruptions, hemorrhoids, fistulas, and other wounds.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already mentioned these diseases and their specific types and treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And please ask in this book about the one that appears in the largest vein when there are wounds that need to be treated, and if you want to know in what way the operation of the iron is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And please ask if the pain of the wound in the beginning is acute and accompanied by percussion and flechment, and sometimes it encircles and if that catches on to the sentiment, you should not neglect the perforation of the vein, and treat that as soon as the shock subsides and help over the matter inside that ends the accident.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	When you want to lay the woman on a bed that has pillows; and recline on your side and adjust your hips so that they are at the entrance of the belly, and your thighs are expanded, and pause your knees away from your thighs, and let her lie down comfortably.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife follows the right side and administers the instrument that is used to open the birth canal, in the form that will be found in those causes that they will make.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument that you fix in the woman's womb, and it is not more than the pregnancy of the woman and leads to the thighs.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is greater than the pregnancy of the woman, then you should stop putting powder on the texture of the woman's womb so that it is prohibited for any instrument to enter the woman's womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should stop the vessel that flows in the midwife's instrument and that the midwife holds and turns the vessel around while it is opened in the woman's womb.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the inflammation appears, and it is touched to the chest and neck, then you must cover that with something to prevent the wind from reaching the head of the patient.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the disease is excreted, you must cover that you stay in the bath for a while with a vat of olive oil mixed with red or green olive oil, and leave the cloth in the section near the anus.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And clean the anus and over the wet wool that is in water where the moldy berries are built.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be cured within two days, and when it is cured, enter the one that is suitable for you to be healthy.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some waters are washed for the anus and the bath is taken with water that is distilled and honey, and in the water that is built with lily or long-standing aromatic herbs, and it returns to the enguent.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the water is taken in the anus, you must cover that you are not allowed to take the cure of the patient with iron, and have the cure that they have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text is not in a language similar
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in an ancient form of English or a different language altogether. If you could provide more context or a translation of the text, I would be happy to help further.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in an ancient form of English or a different language altogether. If you could provide more context or a translation of the text, I would be happy to help further.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in an ancient form of English or a different language altogether. If you could provide more context or a translation of the text, I would be happy to help further.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in an ancient form of English or a different language altogether. If you could provide more context or a translation of the text, I would be happy to help further.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife who is wise and subtle in all those causes, and who guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you show the whole figure of those, and what engine is in those for which it is significant and has been over it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the point is placed on the head per acupuncture, and that is very sharp for the woman and is made in that difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of it is blunted, then they apply a seal or the women hold it, and evaporate the smell of the fenugreek coitus and the olis humitz.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And insert the menstruation between the eyes that are small and sharp, or second the menstruation that comes out of there which is in it because of the humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the abdomen of the woman when she wants to give birth.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If not, then it is believed that the woman is christened with mucous of pigeons and mucous of fenugreek to the cizami.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the doses of the foot are forgotten at the beginning, you should cover those points with your hand easily little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If the woman does not follow the intrament, you should place the foot on a pillow and lift the woman's legs up, and then place the pillow on the ground; and the woman should be held so as not to fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the doses are not turned and the foot is dead, you should insert those and remove the romament from the foot or lia the corset to the ma of the patient and remove that equality, so that it will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the embryo over the patient's feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot is on the patient's feet, you should cover that you push those with your hands, and you should convert the foot little by little, and you should engulf that, and you should take one of the legs and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	If the entrance into the thighs is not done well, you should command that he express it and make him remove that condition, so that it will be forgotten if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If you do not forget that they have recommended, then you should return the small one little by little inside when you pause that second natural figure, so that that one will not be forgotten and will be easier.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited to use all gout, then take some mucilage of aloe and dissolved rubber, and apply it evenly throughout the mortar with good percussion, and make lines of this gout in the female genitalia, at the base of the belly of the person.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And if you find that bone in the watermelon, then it will achieve the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you have removed the parts from the person, then do subfumigation with mirta and sub-pause at that to the person.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have subfumigated for an hour, then do it on a cheesecloth, and make it tear and extinguish the mouth of the person, and take from there, and press the point below the belly of the person with a light compression, until the thing is as forgotten as it was.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyes on the feet and the woman's private parts.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the woman follows this form, you should engage in entering her little by little; and the woman will be evacuated over the knee of the person, and the feet of the person will be below, and those will be on the pillow, and complete your parts.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press gently on the abdomen of the child little by little, and take out that which is now the feet of the child from between the ankles as soon as it is prepared in the part where the knees are.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the child is not forgotten, take the feet of the child and hold them firmly in a gentle movement, and press that which is over the hips little by little as soon as the child can bear it in the parts of the body.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And enter the hands and swallow the child's feet little by little, and command the woman to express it as soon as the child is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The child's foot is laid down while one of the hands is held.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	The artisan should be in reducing the child's thighs, if you cannot reduce it, raise the woman and make that go away.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it does not go away, place the ointment on the bed, and press the thighs of the child with force, and apply liniments to those which you have recommended with ointments.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If it comes to childbirth, you should place that zest on the pillow, and study about the reduction of the mother's belly, and cut the second natural figure, and make the woman lay down and command the one who enters that he forget what he has come for.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The essence of the foot is to expand its parts and the thigh of the patient is in the middle of it.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Make sure that the midwife holds the belly of the foot and turns it little by little, and it will be easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is done and it is cut, and you stop over the chest of the patient that has been recommended oil and muscles.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And when you command him to push little by little, and when he has done it, place that zest on one pillow and command him to be inclined over the right side, and command him to be laid down; and make that stomach turn easily.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The exit of the fetus is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the patient's labor pains become stronger after this maneuver, consider, and you should insert your hand into the vagina when it is emptied of water.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the foot is hung over the face and the neck, then you must insert your hand into that of the emblem, so that it is not held and does not remain.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then press the foot to the parts of the fingers that are inside the second one that covers it, and tell the woman to look at some signs, and if she forgets to apply pressure, then either God or luck will be responsible.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	End of labor pain or pain of many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that some wives have seen three or four veins, and it is strange and hard to believe; not that there are any causes from nature, and I do not live.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, even if they are multiplied, one second, and are separated by ciphac, distinguish those that enter the ligament in the belly of each of those and some veins that are forgotten as is a fetus by natural labor, and some veins that are forgotten by natural labor are like the ones that have been recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to see, the child's part you must follow and come to the one that has been said about the unnatural figures, then care for those as they have been recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is skilled and gentle, and knows how to facilitate and subtlety, and is intelligent throughout the figure of the person according to the doctor's preparation for the engagement leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering that it is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some of them are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth, and you must already verify that a woman aborts only at the fifth, and another one is formed in all, which causes a pain due to the measurement of the glorious savis.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And so it is necessary that the midwife know as much about this as possible, and therefore she will be able to do it accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what has been said in the division of medicine and is not deformed, and you have used for operation as much as you can, consider if the woman is of good virtue and not of those accidents by which she suffers loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying on her back with her head inclined and her thighs raised, then...
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The physician should hold those parts or have them on the bed so that...
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mouth of the larger part of the animal with humor, mucilage of aloe and fenugreek, and seed saffron.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then give the woman the medicine with those humors and mucilage, and place it in the larger part of her body, and close it at the location where the nails are in the foot.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate places for this: then you consider if the foot is prepared to be placed on the head, and you should keep your nails in the holes of the foot, or in the collar, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or further in the beard, or in the shoulder blade, or in the places on the back, or further in the hip bones, or in the groin.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the preparation is on the feet of the patient, then in the patellar or in the muscle of the costals.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	When the woman is lying down with her back against the wall and her legs spread out, and the doctor carefully inserts his hand into the vagina, he can easily feel the cervix and all the organs located in that area, as long as the woman does not have any pain or discomfort.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and stay in the appropriate position another finger or the third one if necessary, to check for enlargement of the glands, and not to extend too far behind the rectum, only as far as necessary.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Be sure to examine the entire area, so that the examination of the patient is as complete as possible and as if it were part of the eradication of the disease.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And pay attention to the area where the extension is soft; and if any part of the patient is held, you should pay attention to the midwife's words that she says is true and insert your fingers there and rotate around that part that is held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the part of the foot is forgotten, then the fingers should be moved to the place where it was placed; and make sure that all of the foot is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the wound is located under another part of the body and cannot be reduced by compression, then cover that area with a cloth; and extract that part from there, taking care not to damage anything outside of it, and insert it either into the joint of the leg or into the thigh.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And cover the other wound with a cloth on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the tooth is large, or if it causes discomfort during the reduction, or if the end of the catheter is adjusted in the mouth, then cover that area with a cloth between the sharp spines and cut off the tip of the catheter, or use an instrument called "alundat," which is similar to the shape of other instruments used in the capitol.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And if the tooth is large by nature: and cover that area with a cloth, or take hold of that tooth with the alundat as has been said; and extract those bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is reduced and causes pain in the shoulder, then be careful to insert the forceps into the joint, as the humidity in the chest should be evaporated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated, and there is no obesity, you should insert the needle as far as possible on the side that suits you best.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the abdomen is apoplectic or in hydrocrotic, you should cover the hole that the moisture makes in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the feces are on the thighs, you should pull out the end of the stool towards the mouth and turn it towards the mouth.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the stomach is distended and the chest, you should cover that part of the drap that will be folded over your mouth, and release the stomach and chest through which the water runs that is in those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are not in motion and return the needle to your mouth, introduce the needle into the left side; if the mouth of the patient is swollen, introduce it into the prepuce, and draw it out through that point, and insert it into the mouth of the patient, and then enter it with one or two pricks.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the pregnant woman is cut by scarlet fever, which occurs in the throat, you should cover it with something that does not cause pain; then, cover it with something that can administer a drizzle of wet humors.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient in oils that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the wart is on the side of the toe, you should possibly be careful not to cut it; and apply what has been told in the living foot.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If it is not possible, you should be incised in presses, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of injury to the second toe.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your operation, apply what has been told in the cure of the scarlet fever that occurs in the throats of the pregnant women.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If diarrhea occurs, you should apply oils that are hot and moisten and apply the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have seen a woman in the belly of which was a wart, and placed over that focus another taken by hand, and the other focus is the same for the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens at some point in time that a sting occurs on the skin; and it begins to swell as soon as it is touched, and then begins to tighten the bandage.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	When I was called for the care of the patient and treated them for a long time, but the plague was not yet resolved.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you examined the patient with great care, and examined an bone, and passed your hand over it for a long time, and examined another bone; and you were too astonished to see that there was no bone in the stomach.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then you thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you tried to cure the plague, and extracted the bones from the patient's body, the female existing in the disposed vaginas, and had been used for a long time, corrected by a small piece of bronze.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	But you did not believe it to be strange, but rather that it is known and helpful for the physician who knows how to use the artificial bone in surgery for the care of the patient.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vagina in which it is opened more:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the strangler in which it is twisted, where the twisting has two virtues at the two ends of two strings:
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	This virtue may be used to apply a stringent or an ebony or basswood ointment.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	Then the length of one fist is two thumbs and the width is one thumb, and the length of one palm is a foot and a half, and the width is a little less than a palm and a half. And in the middle of two fists, there are two adjustments of those feet, of which the length is as much as a foot and a half, and the width is a little less than a palm and a half.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional things are inserted in the mouth of the patient so that it can be opened easily for those when you roll the prescribed ointments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form of that subtle and lesser application might be:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	This application of ebony or basswood may be made according to the form of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of those two additions, there are times when the length is as much as a palm, and the width is two thumbs.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	When you want to open the wound, you should put the female on the bed with her feet hanging down, and then open it wherever there is space.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open the wound with the instrument you have, according to the amount of force you want for the mouth of the wound to pass through, that is, the size of the hole you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the words used by the ancients:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The method of pushing that forces the foot:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of measuring that is counted in the large head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps that the teeth are at the end, as many times as possible, and some are made long according to this form, as many times as possible, on the side of the teeth that is connected and measured.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The method of measuring less:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps that the teeth close at, so that the head of the foot is measured:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise discussing various medical procedures and conditions. Here's a line-by-line translation of the given sentence:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The first line of the text is not in English, but rather in a language similar to Latin, It
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Translation: All those instruments are exercised, and when you have multiplied the species of that and prepared them by the artificer, as it is placed in its operation and as much as you need for the men according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	When the work on those instruments is already done, you must disassemble them, as the need for those cannot be excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	The first source sentence "De extraccio de la segondina" translates to "From the extraction
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the abscess is pressed, you should command the affected part of the body to hold tight to the substance that it contains, and then apply pressure to that area with your hand over the mouth of the patient and over their nostrils, and if necessary, you can squeeze it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	If not, you take a glass and break it on the cover and put it in the mouth of the woman who is about to give birth, like this, as calm and raw as possible, and with a cushion and a camamilla (possibly a type of herb), and Arabic rue, Ceylon lignea, and saint-john's wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the glass, and place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a gourd of peanuts in the mouth of the woman, and hold it until the vapor comes to the concavity of her mouth.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make that person gag as has been said, and the second one will be removed quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this remedy does not work, you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil or ointment of mugwort, and insert it into the womb and wants to take out the second one, and when that is found, extend that hand little by little until it is no longer pressed by the woman's belly.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	When moving the hips to the right and left, it becomes easier.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And make sure it is adjusted in the amount of attraction, so that she obeys and escapes from attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the pregnant woman is closed, we have already recommended the cure of birth and the medical treatment of the fever.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if all causes are not forgotten, remember that you must not tire over that in iteration of abstraction, but rather ensure that this that is entered into the mouth of the pregnant woman lies in the cushion of the female, and applies to her engorgement and terafarmacon; for that will cause it to ripen in about a week and then dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And when it is ripe, it is given to the elevated part of the head and stomach, and that relieves the disease; and then it is administered under fumigations and appropriate doses for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	And the old diseases have already been relieved by fumigation of nitre and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The first source sentence translates to: "Form of an instrument that the woman must use to retain menstrual blood and the second one:".
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	When there is a need to see or to hear.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the tip of the extremity is placed at the end of the candle and the wide end is placed over the flame, and the smoke is placed over the candle's wicks.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold onto that entrance while the smoke is consumed and then another one is entered.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the cure of a non-porous child's buttock.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	If the children do not know and the buttocks of the child are not porous, which are already subtle and smooth.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then advise the mother that it is porous in the part said to be that cipher; and if not, porous in the part of wet sand, and keep in mind that it does not touch the lizard.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place your hand over that thick fabric in the eye and oil; and cure that with the oil that is inside when it is dry.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is smooth, place your hand on the edge of a canula for several days, and remove it when the child wants to urinate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if the smoothness of the buttock is for the consolidation of plague or cholera; then advise that this consolidation is solid, and use the cure we have spoken of in the cure and the plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	When treating the fistulas that are drained from the body, it is necessary to perform a series of steps to ensure proper healing and prevent complications.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that are drained from the end of the body have a low node and large openings, which can be caused by the penis or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And is it a fistula or motes?
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that node is old and curved, it comes from the wetness of the white or subtle humidity, and some of these fistulas have certain penetrating veins.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating veins are connected to water that is excreted and affected by wind; and some use the outlet of excretion, and it is most effective for those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And for those fistulas, some veins are found in the space of the penetrating ones, and enter into the vesica, and enter into the meat of the worm; and for those penetrating ones, enter into the joint of the thigh and enter into the notch of the heel.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	When it comes to knowing the difference between a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula in the buttocks, it is because you place the thin end of the instrument in the buttocks, and then carefully insert or hammer the iron or steel into the fistula when it is not turgid.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is turgidity in that area, then carefully insert or hammer the iron or steel into the fistula when you feel the tent or the hair on the thin end of the instrument entering.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all or proceed with any cause of diarrhea, vomiting, or abdominal distention as they have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and you should take care of it.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the vesica or into the meat of the thigh, its meaning is that it is an indication of urine irritation and a prohibition of that location being solidified in medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and enclosures of pain in the circuit, you should know that the tent enters here if there is no turgidity in the bone and enclosures of pain in the circuit of the opening; and that it causes a cessation of bleeding at all times; and that it does not belong to that medication, nor is it solidified in the enguent.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those fistulas that penetrate, there is no cure for all, and the cure for those is labor and effort of the skilled physicians over which they are placed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, the cure is hoped for secondly if you recommend it to me, and what I have already used and proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And is that the evacuation of the evil comes between your thighs over the side of the abdomen and raises the changes of you inside, the buttocks are inclined to the belly of you, and they try to press or if it is in the fistulas turtulosity, within what you know the place where it goes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that evacuation comes around the anus, you should know that you enter the true duty in the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the true duty that the press is already discovered to penetrate, or another that you feel between the true duty and that evil, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not labor in that, and it is not in that cure, as they have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	May I ask for your help in translating this line? It seems to be a medical term or phrase, but I'm not sure what it means.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	This line appears to be a medical instruction or advice. It suggests using a subtle cauterization tool, such as a small cautery, on the opening of the fistula, following the previous instructions, and then introducing the ignited tool into the fistula opening. The author advises repeating this process a few times until it is known that all the adjusted and fistulated cartilages have been treated, as if they were the feathers of a quill.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	This line seems to be a continuation of the previous advice. It suggests treating the inflamed and swollen cartilages within the fistula opening, as well as those on the surface of the body. The author recommends using medicinal treatments for the damaged and consolidated cartilages, and if it heals, it is good; otherwise, do not expect a quick cure from another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	This line appears to be a set of instructions for performing a procedure on the fistula opening. It suggests inserting a tool into the fistula opening, if it is not already present, and then moving it between the fistula opening and the surrounding tissue, either cartilage or fat. The author advises cleaning the fistula opening with a cloth or sponge, and then checking if the tool is inside the fistula opening. If it is, the author suggests removing it and cleansing it.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And thoroughly cleanse those fistulated wounds which are assembled around the needle of pain and do not blame any cause for them.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If flow of blood occurs many times that comes between you and your operation when you open those wounds, then use the point that is and the pus instrument as an escharot or medicinal cauterization, which cauterization adjusts good doses habitually: it is the adjustment of those wounds adjusted, and the excision of the pain exception due to humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And treat those that are inflamed on the border or within that location gets to the place where the scar is getting hard and consolidated.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines in which are sterilized and excised; when restored it is already cured and does not fear re-treatment.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has gone through the anus of the thigh and is extended from the surface of the skin, then enter the liquid that is in the anus of the thigh and investigate what it is.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If centes the attempt and you enter with a glove or skin, and it is directed to the penetration, then do not operate on it unless second opinion and hope is given.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either by cauterization as has been said; or by securing the entrance that allows for the conviction of the body part that can be most easily entered; and not processing so as not to cut through that which does not contain the lasso, and that may occur over the vulva and vaginal opening of the woman's desire; and to cure that which has been said by God is very difficult for you to become healthy; or by extending that membrane and tying the pus that seeps from that entrance as has been said, or by attempting or using another sharp-pointed instrument and tying those fistulas which are in the cut as can be perforated by you; and to restore the entire plague by cutting, and if the pus does not solidify, and rampant the urinary fistula in the part of the buttock, and it will pierce for the vulva.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	In every case, the fistula is closed according to this method: when you enter the instrument into the fistula, and around the circumference of the buttock at the surface of the skin and in the margin of the buttock, you hold the instrument with a perforated end, which is like a needle for preparing the wound according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	When entering that wound or its surroundings, and appropriately entering the fistula within it to achieve the cavity of the body.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If you penetrate the edge of the buttock, remove the wound from that part as you insert the tissue into the buttock; and remove the end of the wound and adjust the two ends, and stitch each, and leave it for a day or two, and when you have inserted the wound in the flesh, stitch the end that is inserted between those extremities of the wound and that cause pain.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And after treating the plague when it is solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate using any means you have prepared, except for the penis, as that is not in your control; and after it is healed, make sure to stitch that part.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spindle that is used to open the fistula: its curvature is sharp and the other side is not sharp, so it does not penetrate as much as it should, therefore it is not necessary, as often as possible.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	When stitching up the veins that run through the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Veins are seconded by two needles, either placed between the thighs as if they were made of carbon, or those are similar to fatty tissue.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And from those, they are both small and large, and the incision runs through them all, and the threads, and the front of the thigh, and at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are closest to the thigh are usually made of few humors, of which agua citrica or a small piece of sinew is used, and is followed by the color of the flesh.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the care of that which is closest to the thigh is that it commands the thigh to relax and to express itself within the time that the veins become visible and the wounds appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then take care and suspend the needles or those that you have in your hands, and apply them to those parts according to their sensitivity.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the needles do not hold in those due to their humidity or softness, then take them with your hands as rough or sharp or smooth, and insert them into the wounds, and apply them to the edges of the skin, and powder some fine powder over them, so that they are in place of cauterization; or cauterize them after having previously cauterized the top of the cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And accordingly care for those who are cured, entering when they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey excretion, you should stretch the flesh in the area where there is a small bite and wash it with water that comes out of the anus and obeys excretion more easily when the anus is relaxed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are causing pain in the anus, the cause of them is lighter, and it is because you are taking those with your own hand or with another person's hand, and you insert them, and accordingly care for them that have said when they are cured.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have inserted them, know that you should make a suture for them immediately with this hand: take a fine needle and enter it into the hole and extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above, and let it penetrate into the hole of the other part, and wrap the extracted parts of the needle in the edge further from the hole, and stretch the hemorrhoid along its structure, and do not hurt the needle and extract it.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	When gout is present in all joints, and not just one, it indicates that the sinuses of the body are running with that particular humor.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And if you pause over the anus and it is swollen or red, and you pause that part on the tail and command the patient to stop.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you open that entrance that is closed; and when it is open, treat those wounds or other scars that were inside and are now healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Regarding the cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Abscesses appear due to the excess of the gut or due to the constraint of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and not useful in that medicine, you know that those are the points of the spatula or the tube that you use to open them when they are wet and have been infected by those fistulas; and you cure them when they are closed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And you should know that those are the pus that comes out when the first is inside and is not healed, and you cure them when they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Regarding the cure of abscesses, this is closed.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that alirming is closed and not to be used unless the color of the chest does not resemble a clavicle, and it is found throughout the chest and particularly in the areas of the feet and ankles, and therefore for that pain you must stop the medicine.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then, when it is certain that this pain is in the lock and is held by the fetters or by the nails, and is removed from its cause; and then, take care of this.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the next one that follows in the capital part.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More of warts is an insignificant small, rough, round fistula on the surface of the skin, and many veins run through it.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment of this is that it extends or becomes infected there, or that it is irritated by that or by the one inside that box.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize this, as they have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now the warts are already removed and not removed by the instrument that you say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More of termites is an insignificant small, rough, or large fistula on the surface of the skin that extends along the neck, and when the wart becomes inflamed there it resembles a termite bite and is cut around the area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The first source sentence to translate is: "E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you wish, make a needle of iron or steel in this manner:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Be the tip of the cannula traced with great care, not perforated, wrapped around so that over it the learning of this is exposed and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant with the one indicated in the cauterization of the tail at the head of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments that are administered to give cristers.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some vaginas are made of silver or lead or melted or hammered; and some vaginas are made of those instruments small and large according to those which are administered, four that which is administered in the care of small children is small; and of that of those whose ends are rough or rough, the cristers of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few cristers:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the cannula of which is traced the bag is wide according to this manner; and at that difference, the bag is lied in different ways.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	When the end of his penis is located in the anus, it is either not cut (not circumcised) or it is a leonine one, which is behind subtlety; and in the other side of the thigh there are two openings, and on the other side there is one opening, and the width of the opening is according to the thickness of the thighs, and it is quite wide.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	If the bag in which the medicines for the animal's bladder or the wool of the sheep are placed, and the root of his penis is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	If it is pierced by the teeth that revolve around it, and if the space that exists between the openings is the largest of the said one.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	If it enters deep into those openings, which are far from each other, or if you surround them; and adjust the bag accordingly; and when it is placed on him, it should be tightly tied at the head of the priest between two distinct ones, and around each one of the openings: May the quality of priesthood that you place on the bag of the medicine, which is scaled according to the tolerance of the thighs; and keep in mind that it should not be too long nor too short.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	When the patient is lying on their stomach with their thighs raised and supported, and a pillow is placed under their chest, and another person holds their feet, it is necessary to extract the cauterizing point. And if it is made of oil or albumen of honey or mucilage of fenugreek or similar, and it is inserted into the anus with ease, and the nurse takes the bag and expresses the liquid from it as much as possible before it is completely evacuated into the bowels, and then extra the bowels and the patient take their limbs to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine fails to alleviate the pain, hold on to it as much as possible; and if you doze off for a whole night, you will feel better in the morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you ceremoniously dedicate that in the remedies for abdominal disorders and the desiccation of the thigh, then you should repeatedly apply the cauterization where it is healthy.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are exudations or protrusions, then you should be the ceremonious one among them and the one who sets the standards for the children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	In the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And you have already said in the division of the treatment of the plagues that it is appropriate for the free, and you say that the cure of those who are equal to and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, say that the plagues are divided according to what is painful to the plagues and according to the location where the plaques are located.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which you vetch are painful to the plagues are such as gout, or scrotal enlargement or hernia, or percussion, or lancing, or suturing, or semblance to those causes of motions.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Mays the afflictions that are in the parts of the body are similar to those that affect the head, neck, chest, belly, and limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	When you are recommending the cure for some diseases by pausing that reasoning and rule over other diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you begin with the simple headaches, where the reminder of the compounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, when you have a simple headache that is not fractured, consider whether it is due to kidney stones or appearance, and if the skull has been shattered, and there is a great pain in the head, and there are fears about that side having appendicitis, then cut the skull as much as possible, and do not delay too long; and extract from that part of the sinus second, and if it does not cause any other cause to be excluded, mainly if the sinus is infected, then it is better to leave it.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is the opposite side of the infected part, and guard the sinus of repletion and of vomiting and of fatty foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If there is any restriction in the diet, then you should be less hungry and do not approach meat or fatty foods.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And rest over the wound, if it happens to be a gangrene, let cautery be applied, and pour in olive oil or vinegar of the kind that is antiseptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of gangrene, rest over the wound, if it is recently sawn and the air has not changed, use the powder that I recommend in a small amount.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, rest over the wound until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or was caused by an injury and not properly adjusted lips of the patient, adjust those sutures according to the suturing recommended by me for their sutures.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already been exposed to bone and tendon, but there is no retention of the patient except for a small suspensory, you may incise it and apply appropriate care to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the thigh to be cut into vessels in which there is fat: caps and form like them, and semblances of them, when it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If you find decay in the spine and it does not adhere to the bone, then you should cut out all of this putrid matter and remove it, and properly care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these plagues an artery or vein of the kind that carries off the humor may become blocked and not be removed by physicians, then you should inquire about the artery, and if it is not cut open, then you should cut it open along with the spatium; and if this causes discomfort to those who have told you so, then you should cauterize within that sanc which has been blocked.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, the cause of them is lethargy; I do not know whether you should powder over those this powder, which has become compacted, so that the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the recipe for the powder is as follows: ointment made from one part of ensem, from dragon's blood in three parts, and all mixed and crushed, and the plague filled with it, and held together by good constriction over that which adheres to it, and coagulated within that sanc.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And properly tighten that pillow around the head and adjust it, and do not move it while the patient is asleep, so that it does not cause discomfort to the patient during the treatment until they are cured.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And if you alone cut it, when you are not in my presence and there is no doctor present.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is performed on the largest wounds when it is necessary to place it over them and make them straight, and recent wounds of the same patient, which have not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially during summer, you do not see this powder in its position, nor does it cure those who have said that you hold it over those engaging points or over those poles of the flour of the other water and honey when they are getting wet; and it cures those in another cure when they are cured.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you accidentally break the bone in the leg and it is small, you should take this out with your hand.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	When you treat a fracture of the head with cold humors that cause inflammation, it is customarily called a "cold" by doctors.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the evils of the colon.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the disease occurs in the colon, there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to that of a simple head cold.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves or arteries of the colon have been cut or are inflamed, then avoid touching them unless it is necessary for treatment, as this can cause severe spasticity, similar to that which occurs in the intestines and bladder when they are inflamed.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not press on the disease for any cause of all fever, as the substance of the nerves becomes inflamed and the continuation of it leads to the brain being affected, which is why it is pushed out from all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this disease is treated with unclean water, it is necessary to use alcohol-based or not-alcohol-based soap, and then wash the hands thoroughly with this soap, followed by the other fingers one by one, and then dry them.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	When the plague is large, you should administer sutures or scrape the lips of the patient, and properly care for that part after it has been healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	When the plague is deep or has occurred in the lower part of the abscess, you should perforate it in the least painful place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	When in the plague an artery is already involved and a flux of blood follows, you should separate or dry that part, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary to stop the flow.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the plague the spinal bones of the loin have been opened and the veins of the collarbone are saved, you should adjust the lips of the abdomen with a suture over the root of the loin and do not touch that; adjust it as much as possible and reduce it to its natural figure, and stretch it evenly, and tie it there for a long time; and properly care for it in the places where it is stitched and excited after it has been cleaned.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	When in the bone the plague has already set in, you should percuss it, and if in it there are fragments of bones, extract all that you can from them; and what is not apparent to you, tie it up inside after the plague has healed, and separate the limb and the flesh of the patient.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the plague is recent, sprinkle powder over that powder which you have recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the plague there is a fistula, treat that with the powder of that which rememoration will come most properly to the head of the matter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the colon or seemingness, when it is between the scales and is made of spazza or spaza or lansa or semblants.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of lansa or cotel, and sometimes of the depth, consider if the plague has ventositat when the thigh becomes; you know that the plague is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in it there is not depth and the plague is recent to the head of the matter, you stop in it at the first hore polvera, and do not stress that so the sanc may not be held in the depth of it and return to the heart and may not disturb the thigh, but pause in it attracted, and delay until those doas are seen on the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the enguent is not present to you, you stop in the orrifici of the plague cut off for that which comes out of the humiditatz; and make that the thigh sleeps over the plague so that it runs aquo that is adjusted in it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	When the plague has passed three days or more and no spasm or tremor of the bad heart, nor stricture of the gut, occurs in the thighs, and sometimes other good positions of the body, you know that the plague is saved; and then cure that one with calm and the other curing when it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the cure of the patient is excused and it has already been opened, you know that a fistula has been made; then cure that one with the head capital.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is due to constipation or cotton and it is simple on the surface of the chest or thighs, you can cure that one with the treatment that is preceded by suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been an incision in the bone and it has not yet been removed from the patient, you can tighten the plague and then extract those presses, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, you can cut the presses that are coated with plague and the extraction of them is delayed.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	When other diseases occur in the other parts of the body, the treatment for this is the treatment for gout that has been called.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From the diseases of the stomach.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, small, or intermittent.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great some veins and nerves of the intestine, by which an introduction is made of them and their suture is made to be firm and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small dislocation is difficult to do with another hand, and if it is found that the reduction of them is difficult, then do not hesitate to make an introduction of them into their place as soon as possible, because they will be engrossed and the introduction of the intestine will be difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And the better dislocation is intermittent, because in that it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the special cases mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	Do you know that the suture of the stomach is done by four hands, and that fewer sutures are common that are suitable for sutures of other diseases of the body?
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two other wounds communicate with other plagues, but not in the abdominal wound itself.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you every exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the plague is small and affects the intestine due to some cause of the thigh, and it is difficult to reduce it, then you are in one of two hands: either due to the difficulty of disruption as they have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when that is the case, you know that you should soak that in water that you submerge a sponge full of humid earth alone, or that you soak in water with squash, cyperus, and spike, and embrocation, and apply to that the intestine if the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some ointments have been found that cause the inflammation to subside more than water alone.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you hydrate the intestine with water in which the thigh is placed in the warm and mallow, so that the intestine can be loosened by a little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the patient's joint pain is caused by cold humors, then you should cut the inflammation with a small sharp instrument to prevent further damage to the injured blood clots.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first treatment is better when it is not cut and does not cause bleeding, and is not an obstacle to the necessary and timely removal of the affected part.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	The form of the instrument depends on the shape of the affected area.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp pain, and the other part of the non-sharp pain, and the subtle end, and not at the subtlety of the sputum, is harder than a few.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the swelling is amplified and comes out of the intestine, you should make sure that its reduction is in the natural form of the body, in the proper place, if possible, over there, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the inflammation is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make sure that you perform the operation on the patient's back, and stop the movements of the intestine as much as possible; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should stop the cap of the intestine and hold the chest as much as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	If it seems that the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your attention and consideration for the most part in order to determine which part is affected.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And it is necessary that you administer this remedy for the great pains and the lesser pains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In the lesser pains, pause this remedy that is for you prepared, and make sure that the minister is between your most painful areas, holding the displacement of the whole by his own hand and adjusting the lips of it, and make sure to descend from there to where it was and cause another suture if any cause another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture method: one that you grasp the cord, according to the number of the amplitude of the pain; and lay it from the extremity of the disruption of the said ring, and draw the cord one, another that you do not let yourself off in the two ends of the chain, as in the two ends of the cipher that you leave the chain of the parts of the intestine, when you make it penetrate into the part; and you have already added the two ends of the chain and the two ends of the cipher, and then make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	If you tightly grasp the double knot in the loop of the string, and some threads of different parts are seen, and then add more thread lips and plaits for better decoration; and cut off the excess of this one and fix another hole in the same place, and tie it to the first one as if it were the first knot of the first loop; and do not stop until all the knots are tightened when the entire contraction of the plait is complete.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The knots are finer between coarse and subtlety, four of the subtle knots slightly incise the flesh; and the large ones are difficult to insert in the codpiece, therefore for this reason they must be both fine and large.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	It is not necessary for the knot to be fixed at the extremities of the codpiece, because if the flesh is not slightly incised and the plait is pushed forward before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	They are not prolonged by suture so that the plait is not prevented from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	When you have inserted the ends of the needles so that they do not pierce the flesh; and placed your hand over the expanded pulverized parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them inside when you know that the plague has become solidified.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of sutures with needles in the hand are convenient for small plagues, as there is enough room in the suture for one or two needles or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is as follows: and it is that you administer through the suture to the four ends, from the neck and tail extremities, in a line, with an needle in which the thread unwinds in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle of that member of which you began, so that the thread returns to the upper part of the plague, so that this suture is the second suture of the drape made of the fabric that the fabrics are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	When you pause between each stitch, measure the size of the given piece of cloth.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This suture is made by men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	This suture is made by cutting the skin, which was injured in the stomach of a man who had been bitten by a snake, and was the disruption of the plague major of a palm, and was eviscerated from the two sides of the intestine of the patient's location and was the disruption in the intestine; and then you reduce that which the intestine had suffered from the plague for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague has consolidated in the space for fifteen days or more, and it is cured that and becomes healthy; and afterwards, it grows again over the years, and is discussed in its respective positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had said that they were not healthy; and by miracle, for example, if you did not cure it, where it was located in the place where there was no atrophy or any medicine, but rather, cover it with plague cloth twice a day and drink melted honey from the fire until the plague becomes healthy.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	When a woman has pain in her groin and thighs, it is called "mays" (a type of suture). According to the story of Parala, there are two types of sutures that can be used.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And do you mean the suture for the abdomen, and enter the needle at the damaged part of the incision?
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And when the needle penetrates into the abdomen and through the cartilage according to the right and long way, and the other end of the circle where you have inserted the needle; and let the other end of the needle pass through the other end of the rib from the opposite side.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in the other end of the rib opposite to the damaged part of the incision; and let the other end of the circle that is in this loop, and let the needle penetrate into the other end of the damaged part of the rib from the opposite side.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And let the needle penetrate into that penetration in the circle that you made in the rib, at the end of the rib where you made the penetration; and let the other end of the circle that is in this loop, and let the needle penetrate into the other end of the damaged part of the rib from the opposite side.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	When you begin with this side and cut away that part which is at the extremity of the finger, and extract the bead of the nail which penetrates, and return it to its place in the same nail and cover the end of the finger that is on the other side; and extract that from the nail which is from your hand.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make another incision and another, and make another incision within that which you have cut all of this that follows after that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this suture is that you cut the suturing of cartilage which cuts the hair, and that you cut the finger a groove on the end of the nail, and that it sees another groove within that when it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second kind of suture proper is that which is called the Gualia suture, and this is for the purpose of treating a fracture, and it is recommended by physicians because you cut that second semilune which they cut the bone with, and it seems that they add all parts to its corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the end of one limb to the other end of the limb, and this is done according to what I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have inserted the needle into the extreme tip of your thumb, and made it penetrate into the nail bed at that point, and saw two extremities of the cipher; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the nail to the finger through two extremities of the cipher.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And you should revolve those parts, and let each of the parts that are affected penetrate into the opposite part of the body through two extremities other than the one being treated.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This suture is better than the common suture, and is the one that was previously remembered.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Guy.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they may tell you that the abdominal suture is corrected by two needles, so that you enter through these with a needle, and then begin to introduce the needle of that which you must, and let it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those that cause the closure of the corners.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when there is a displacement in the lower part of the abdomen, the suture of the intestine is difficult to do than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgment of medical treatment for the plague is judged by the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The one that causes it is when you can get the plague recently by the air that is sacred and changes that, and reduces the intestines and bellies of that and makes them suitable for that, then stop on that earthly powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has already altered the plague, then stop on that alcus which are those that come to your presence when they make hard pus and break the fields, and they become consolidated and mirated; and take care of that plague as it is the curacy of other plagues when it is cured.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have access to medicines, then stop on that thistle, pus that begins to get wet, cut it off, change the other two veins of the day, as it is for you and teach, when it is cured, so you will not need another medicine in cases disposed when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague communicates injuries in the main members, then cover that you submerge the lion's wool in olive oil of tempered quality, or in rose oil, and stop it on the circuit of the loci which are between the ankles and leave the ass's belly.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the thighs, then more cases should be done on that, cover that you destroy the black stiptic with a white one, and especially if the wound permeates the thigh and makes an exit penetrating into the cavity of the conquavit.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You should know that the remedy for a large intestine is different from that for the small intestine.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	However, it is difficult to treat the intestine called "gout" with plague remedies, as it does not receive the same treatment as other parts of the body due to the great number of veins in it, its large size, its subtle nature, and its proximity to the natural nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Therefore, if you are treating the gout with plague remedies, and you have recently used this method, return to your usual treatment to reduce the intestine's constipation.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been some time since you used this method and you have already passed black or green stools, then you should apply the remedy to the affected area over the location that is denigrated by the sac, as fluxes of sand will come through the tissue, which contains veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then insert that remedy into the other part, and pause the end of the cord before the end of the plague forum, so that over you is alleviated the attraction of the plague due to the pain of the tissue and the emission of the plague from the bowel.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	This line seems to be a remembrance of the diseases that occur when one gets sick in the intestine. In other words, it is a reminder of the various illnesses that can affect the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be repaired by certain home remedies, as you have seen in the case of that which was affected in the lower stomach by percussion with a knife and was the plague of the part on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was an old one and caused a fistula, and it was a sign of the management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	When you have completed the patient's treatment, regardless of whether it was previously treated in the hospital, continue to subtly insert that entrance where the hot bath is and the place becomes solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	If you see that the place is already solidified, then cover the patient's belly with the cloth that you will use to cover the accident in the abdomen; and do not allow any accidental injury to enter, and do not let food or drink pass through the mouth, and then put on the bathrobe and exercise in your own words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	It has been said to experienced ones that when the intestine is inflamed and small, you should cover it with this manner: and that you take large needles; and adjust the lips of the fissure and stop one needle over the lips of the fissure; therefore, when you press on them and tighten your mouth, you will cut the tip of the needle, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then pause another fissure by the same manner, and do not stop doing this until you have made another fissure according to the quantity of the entire fissure.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and say the same about the hernia; and pull those annexed parts within the intestine as soon as the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient's genitals.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is hidden in a subtle thing that is made of the intestine of an animal, because it is more like a needle; and it is that you grasp the end of these intestinal parts, and it is a waste, and reduce the end of that intestine to the end of the needle, and enter it into those needles and into the intestine of that patient, and reduce it in disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this maneuver of stitching is not only a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the hernia is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, then you will not be able to simply subdue it, and it will not be cured from the entire body.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of hernias and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that all hernias and abscesses occur when they are inflamed and in ancient times, and an ulcer is formed, and it is not consolidated and gets bigger over time and does not separate, in any member, universally it is called a fistula and we call it that abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	When a fistula is formed by nature, it is hard, white, and smooth, without pain and with a cavity that conforms to the shape of the body; and for this reason it is called an alimentary canal, that is, a passageway.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	It is in the alimentary canal of wet humans, which secretes mucus; and very little water is lost in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some of this moisture is watery, and very little, and thick, and thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already said in the division, that I told you of the plagues, that any wound that is not cured or does not heal in the bare flesh, is not a disease but for one of the following causes: of which one is too little of sanctification in the flesh; or of malice of the body; or between the body and the lips there is hard flesh naturally; or it is watery leaking; or that ulceration itself met with bad matter in the tramesa; or that medicine is not suitable for the cure of the body; or when corruption comes into the region, and it is a pestilence; or by the nature of the region, as in Saragossa, where it is difficult to digest the diseases, and it is delayed in the apostema cure by nature; or that there is one, or several bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When all causes have been shown, and the symptoms of those causes are treated by doctors in their division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I ask you to tell me the treatment of fistula, which is made by surgery as much as possible.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	I know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; four out of those are fistulas that reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the bladder, or the vesica, or to any part of the chest, or to any part of the spine of the two, or to any part of the joints composed of the muscle and the foot; and those that give proximity to the main member and resemble.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And for those of these fistulas that are followed by this method, they are of difficult diagnosis and not receive treatment, and occupation of the doctor is necessary and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas has a depth that does not reach those places that were said, and you hope and trust in the treatment of the doctor, and you want to reach knowledge of the doctor, then try to remove it with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows correctly, and ask for that from the doctor.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	When the fistula is tortuous, investigate whether that part of the subtle thrust is causing the levitation of the heart to be pulled and curved, deviating from the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula has many holes, it is not possible for you to understand what I mean about the point.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Christianize the wound with your wounds, for the humidity by which you cleanse that one must also cleanse the others and their corruption.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Inquire with great care, for which hand can you possibly identify if here you have bones or nerves, and is the cavity of the long or short fistula, or is it a fistula that has many holes and all of this is under the sum of your strength, your endurance, the endurance of the thigh, and the victory over pain, and the compression of the location, and the understanding and the causes of the accidents in the appendage.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have been over all those causes, you will see the cure according to your confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula or in its place long, distant from the joint, or from nerves, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the parts which you say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula after it is opened according to the narcotic of the patient, and stay there that which is in that filtration and of corrupt carns, and that which is born in the slaughterhouse of the carn, or of the thigh and of appearance, and cure that part which is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long depth and is rectal, you should cover it as deeply as possible in the preon as much as possible, and modify all of your corrupt carns; and administer enveloped needles into acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula that you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And use some of the sharp needles that the acute medicine burns all that is present in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And restore those that engender healthy carns within which is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not cured by that, you should cauterize that according to what has been recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is known and you must certify this, then you should inquire about that and dry that second part which has been recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as they have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bones are discovered and found to be corrupt or blackened, then you should immediately treat that part where the corruption is located; and afterwards, cure that part with this remedy that it may become healthy again.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healthy and free from pain as it should be, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and then you discover the second part and examine it carefully, and make the reason for the change and the transformation of the body according to the same fortified tie, and afterwards restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healthy, then so be it; and if not, you know that that corruption is in the depth of the body, which has not been able to reach, and therefore you do not have the means to remove it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the bones are corrupted slightly, or you are able to remove it, then you should know that you can remove it with these subtle forceps that are used for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If those bones are hard, then you make the extraction of all those, and of those that do not have any cause due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If you have any disagreement with any cause of cold humors and in their innards there is neither fear nor mistake, then insert those limbs or bones if they are here, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones of your own hour, then pause over the water that wets those bones, and leave it inside that it is not within the environment of those bones of carns and limbs, and keep the water that is not solidified, and strengthen the cut you have made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear, pause over the cotton submerged in olive oil or cotton submerged in Egyptian anguish or in a cup of cold water, when it has been immersed in those limbs and bones are separated from the ablation, and from those attractions they are alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a great bone that is like the bone of a hammer or a thigh or something similar to those, and that part of it becomes corrupted in its face so much, then reduce that resistance only by entering that which is left of the negro and corruption, and restore the water.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the joint of the body is corrupted, and the corruption has reached the medullary part of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entire entrance into the location where the corruption has pervaded, and then cure that within which is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you go to a man in his thighs so that he can hold it steady and assist you with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about xxx years old had pain in his thigh, and there were many bad parts on the material of the body that entered the thigh when the material was permeated by the thigh, and it was a large apoplexy, and I did not consider it as an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then I extended the time for that due to the error of the doctors when the apoplexy was happening, and corrected the materials moved, and the cure was stopped at the place where the fistula was made, and there are some in those motions which all get perforated and the dryness of the face.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	When the care of many doctors has passed over these years, and it was not known in this art, but when you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the wound of him and the materials that came out of it those wounds for great pain in his body; and all of his was completely destroyed and the color of his was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then you inserted your hand into one of those wounds and the tentacled came to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then you examined all the wounds and found that they had reached all parts of the wound.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then you cleaned it and placed something over the wound that you had found a part of the bone, and corrupted that part, and it was already corrupt and degraded; and it was already corrupt a part of the wound that had entered into the flesh.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I understood that this was discovered and prepared by the bone discovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you thought that it was not in the bone but only that corruption which had been cut off and hidden, and you had already fallen.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then make sure the restoration of the plague is done in a consolidative way for a long time and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you will continue to explore and discover about the bones secondly after discovering the first, and you will find continuous corruption in the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And take notice of that corruption appearing to me, and then you will do proper treatment for the cure and restoration, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discovered the other vein and did not stop inserting the bones little by little particularly and perforating the restoration of the bone, and it was not restored until I inserted around a palm of the bone, and that extracted from the marrow of the bone, and then restored it with medicines, and it became slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to repeat the operation and section of the bone except for the disposition of the bowels and for the lack of tolerance of the patient and the pain of death, where there was an accident in all hours due to superfluity of evacuation without sincopi mala.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	This sentence is saying that the cure is complete and there are no hard bones in the place of the joints; the good disposition of the patient's body is restored, and their virtue is returned; and they are conversed with in their positions and no harm is done to them in walking or in any other cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the pain is in the chest, you must follow this second hand: and you take hold of the limb and stretch it at its extremity, and command that it extends in your; and then you cut off the limb with a smooth edge of the first limb; and you place that limb over the flesh that is left of the chest, and extend the wound so that it touches the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place you want to sew so that the stitch does not come out of the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause for a moment the table of the chest, where when you are doing it, it is not forbidden to sew that does not cut the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And make sure that the stitching is over the rotten part little by little, where if it is in the concavity of the rotten bone and does not appear at its appearance in the feeling, and then to the stitching of another watched one.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bones are rotten and not in the chest, then continue one part to another, and the rot is at the end or in the part of the other, you must uncover all the flesh of all parts; and then pause for a moment, and then sew that of the first part which is the rot when it is continued the stitching of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	When the gallstone is located at the site of corruption, it is called a gallstone. This is what they have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is in the joint, insert the point of the corrupt joint, and hold down the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If the corruption is in the continuation of several joints, it is not necessary to act there for this reason.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the chest of the patient or the foot, it is very difficult; but I advise you to find out where the corruption appears to you, and remove it, and adapt it according to each position that is possible for you, and make sure it does not cause any contradiction with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You know what instruments and how to insert them into these bones are according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their size, and their subtlety and size and fineness, and their hardness and rarity; because I advise you to prepare for all types of operation instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You should know that this operation means for you on the special of the instrument that you ask; when you have great knowledge and long study and experience with the hands of this art, and testimony of hands of diseases, where laborers already have you the avias by your measures that are convenient for you from the sturmentz in all disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you should form in the end of this chapter the number of the instruments that you will use as simple as possible, those you will process for your prohibition which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large serra:
Forma de ray:	Form of ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray should be according to the form of the star-shaped lock cap, and its points should be according to the form of the steel points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not seem otherwise that they are confricadatz with the caps of the joints when they are corrupted, or is the mouth very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The first line of the text is not in English, but it seems to be a description of a medical instrument or tool. 
Forma de razori menor:	The second line also describes a medical instrument or tool, but it is smaller than the one described in
Forma de razori lat:	The third line seems to be describing a type of pain or discomfort that is caused
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	by a sharp tool that is placed on the surface of the foot and has a pointed tip, and the member of the body affected by the pain is also affected by it. This suggests that the pain is caused by a specific medical condition or injury.
Forma de lu:	The fourth line seems to be describing a type of person or
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	a tool that has been used to create a concave shape. This could refer to a medical instrument used for surgery or a dental tool
Forma de razori autra subtil:	The fifth line seems to be describing a type of tool that is smaller and more subtle than the one described earlier
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	The sixth line seems to be describing a tool with a curved tip, which could be used for various medical purposes such as cutting or scraping.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The seventh line seems to be describing a tool that is similar in size and shape to a tenter, which is a type of medical instrument used for
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	a surgical tool used to cut bones. This suggests that the tool is being used to perform a specific medical procedure.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The ninth line seems to be describing a smaller version of the incisor tool, which could be used for more
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	different medical procedures. The fact that it is described as being similar to a razor suggests that it is a sharp and precise tool. The extremity of the tool is curved, which could be used for various purposes such as cutting or scraping. The tool is also displayed in multiple locations in the bones, which suggests that it is being used for a specific medical purpose.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	This is a medicinal recipe for making bone meal or "bone powder." The term "form" in this context means "recipe" or "method," and "ray" is likely a misspelling of "rayon" or "rays
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The end of the bone is tridentate and sharp-pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	When it comes to the end of joints and the tightening of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The end of joints can be caused by intrinsic or extrinsic factors, and if you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the treatment does not work, sometimes the corruption can leave the member that did not perceive any cause, it is possible that the wound entered there for that to be exposed to the mortality or malice that is greater defilement of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of the member that was affected, is that it becomes black inside because it is what has been burned, or it can be placed properly in the blackness that is inside that member which seeks to seize the entire body and takes hold of everything; and therefore you should have made an incision on that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And if it seems that the corruption is caused by the impact of some causes poisonous as from the sting of the scorpion or of a viper or of a rabbit and similar,
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the impact is at the end of it, you should make an incision on it and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	When you seem to reach the abdomen, then insert your hand into that of the umbilicus, and do not leave space for corruption to enter when you grasp the abdominal muscle of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If you need to insert your arm inside the thigh at the joint, then do so.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another corruption passes and you sometimes turn the thigh, then that is the death of the patient; and administering another cause another in cure is a matter of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When it seems that pain is occurring in the foot due to corruption of the joint, then you should insert it into one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you hold the foot at the ankle, then you should insert it into the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it may enter the knee, then you should insert the cushion into the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has already spread to the knee, then you should not attempt to treat it, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of inserting the member or compressing it is that you stretch the limb at the point where you want to insert it, and stretch another limb over the place; and extend the ministry to one limb at the points where you want to extend it, and extend another ministry on its; and you separate the flesh that is between two limbs at the end of which you have discovered all the flesh, and insert or compress as much as possible.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And if it is necessary to pause the bandage on the limb for all parts where it does not touch the place, and comes to the knee adjusted and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If you happen to have a flux of blood when working, then you should cauterize the affected area or place some powders that restrain the blood flow on it; and return to your treatment once it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then link the affected member to its corresponding part, and treat it accordingly when it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I advise you to attend to a man in the stool, this accident that happened to you and to me, which I mentioned earlier, was caused by the negro in the stool who was assembled for combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first appeared in the stool when you had to hold the whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for his accident by pushing the curacy to the member with great vehemence because of the pain and the inflammation of the member, and he went inside the joint, and the fire was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, accident happened to you that corruption in the indicated part of the stool.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I won over you, and so I returned to your superfluity that was paused over the part of the medicine, according to the world-renowned cosmetics; and it does not repercuss the superfluity and begins to go to another part where it began in the part.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	When the surgeon inserts his hand into the patient's groin, and you do not want to expect any repercussion from that superfluity, and rather than fear the incision of the patient's groin, which was overcome by weariness, he should insert his hand.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And I thought that my leg would break, it returned to its place and came back to me that the one who prepared it had inserted his hand and closed the wound, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have related this story only because it is an auxiliary over this malady, and that it has a significant meaning and follows the same course.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the treatment of the knee and the quality of clisterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in the fleshy parts of the body and the abscess is prolonged because it collects filth, and then it bursts and perforates, and the filth is exuded from it, and the location is sutured as if it were a wound, and the stitch that covers the wound is removed when it is soft like silk, and no corruption follows, and no pressure is applied to the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a joint, and no fistula is formed.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	When however the space is prolonged within which corruption presses upon any member, it is called a fistula and does not close.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure of the patient is to sit in that position where the body rotates, and more especially when it is made softer and thinner, and more comfortable so that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the position adheres and that corruption does not follow due to this, and if there are many faces in the codena, then take care of that with antiseptic.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And do you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that you see is of an unpleasant odor, then you cleanse that with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and vinegar and is received in a vessel, and are placed over the fire within which that medicine is roasted and turns into a specific smell.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and cleanse the medicine on the sinus, and stretch the applicator of it, and place the medicine in it for the number of hours you need.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then take that which is precious and extract it; and do this for several days until the sinus is softened and the skin is moistened.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	When certain veins are filled with ash, and you do not present this medicine to the patient at that time; and it is because you take the ash from the fire, and put water on it, and then roll it over the water with your hand, and close it when you think that the said vein is empty.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash of the fire, you should roll that water over it and mix it with honey and a certain amount of sugar, and then roll it over that water again with honey mixed with sugar, because honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the intestine adheres to it, especially when there is excessive dryness and thirst.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you make gout for certain veins and you are sure that the intestine is already clean, you should roll that water over it to make it more nutritious for the flesh.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is because you take some of the ointment and dissolve that water in olive oil and see if it has sterility; or if you roll that water on certain medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have written about in the book of ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the orifice of the sinus is straight in which the catheter of the urethra does not receive, you must enlarge that small piece little by little, and stop when it is wrapped in a Egyptian glove or a Basilicon cloth inside which it is amplified.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the orifice is amplified, you must add the lips of the catheter and adjust the quantity inside the urethra.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifice of the vessel from which the blood flows is elevated in parts, you must dry that in the lower part where it runs out, so that the blood does not enter inside the sinus cavity before it is formed.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If you cannot dry the sinus inside the bone according to your wish, then you must perforate that member with the preparation you have chosen, according to what is suitable for you and not to cause any obstruction to the blood.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	 And apply consolidative medicines that are placed over the sinus according to what you want to extend over the cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	When the cloth is as large as possible to communicate the entire sinu; and then insert an incision at the right side of the orifice of the sinu with a thin, ample piece of a few that the sinu's orifice; and extend over other cloth from the lips of the patient according to the size of the incision, and place it over that for the long position of the sinu's orifice so that the swelling of the gallbladder does not obstruct the large cloth for at least a few days with a vegetable.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Only that which is over the sinu's orifice, which remains constant in all hours that it causes pain because it adjusts to the gallbladder.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And for what reason do you know if the pain of the gallbladder is due to it being full or empty, or not digested?
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And do you also consider the location of that sinu, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in the appendix?
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medical treatment is prolonged in that manner, and you see the matter that is being placed over the sinu's orifice adheres, or if it has an appropriate adhesion, do you hold the displacement of the plague or the third day, and when the plague is displaced, do you change the cloth for another and renew the engagement?
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If the sinu is long and has a subtle space, it does not despise the adherence of it, which is appropriate for the sanacio of the one, which is due to the slow generation of flesh in those places where there are plagues, and of those who have the contrari of him.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinu is long and has a subtle space for three days, it does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinu is delayed and prolonged, you should adjust the medicine with desiccation, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and vertut, they become dry as they are finally added, when they are adjusted with superfluity of addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most difficult part to cure is that which you take from the addition of dyafinicon and is dissolved in olive oil, and is over the voice of the one who has it, and is comfortable for him, and uses it accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems to make an effect in that action, when there is no brac, and the addition of dyafinicon is not found, and when it is found, use it accordingly; or what you take mixed with aloe and enses, and throw all over it and powder it over the mel when it is heated, and line it above the drap and press that over the sinu; and line that with the mel that you have taken from when it was engross, and powder it over drap and press that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	This sentence appears to be describing a remedy or treatment in the field of alchemy or herbalism. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the vein is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, you know that corruption occurs in the preon of the patient, and you have already made inquiry into the bones or other hard parts or ligaments; then, to cure it, use the cure of the disease as prescribed.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of corns and worn-down nails and incision of the fingertip added and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	When the blister or gangrene is located on the sole of the foot or in other parts of the body, and it is prolonged and the cure is neglected, or it is postponed, or it becomes corrupted, and the corrosion spreads to the sole of the foot, and it becomes very corrupt, and it penetrates the bone that enters the smell of the fetid odor, and the extremity of the said lady is affected, and its color becomes black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	When you have that cold humor that has been spoken of in division and does not satisfy your cure, then cover yourself with iron to cover the excess that is rising from the ungla and cut the plagla as much as possible with cauterization, for cauterization is helpful in this matter.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bones are healthy and the hernia is full, and the parts of the hernia begin to compress the points of the intestine, then cut that part and leave it subtle on this angle of the hernia that punctured the intestine and push it inside, and insert it am easily; then hold it there until it is completely consumed by the intestine's corrosive medicines; and then cure that am entirely.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If corruption has already taken hold in the bones, then cover that you inscribe the bones with that and the excesses, for no time is ever cured when it is in those corrupted bones.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the corruption and corruption go into the disease, then you must inscribe that according to which is remembered by the nose, and cure that within what is cured.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	When there is pain in the thigh at the end of the joint or limb, and the pain is very intense, you should cover that part with a cloth, and then cut off the outer layer of the thigh, and soak it in vinegar, and keep it moist until the cut does not penetrate into the flesh that you have removed from the thigh, so that when you apply pain to the thigh, and cause it to contract excessively in that place; and then care for that area with this remedy that reduces the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	When it is tightly fitted, which is found in the majority of men's bodies, very much flesh, and very much bone, or very much skin.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And the flesh of him is born in the joint's origin, or is the birthplace of his flesh from the belly.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And that which is born in the belly of man is not bad, and this which is born in the joints is very bad.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born with much flesh, the cut is less, and it is that you should make this cut on its own skin.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	When the joint pain is present from birth, the treatment is difficult; therefore, keep away from the abscess of the same.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the one who is not born from the navel, cover that you inserted at the beginning of the flesh of the other into the bone, and then press with one of those convenient cushions to this, and care for that which is healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Greater stability is achieved when the movements between the parts do not cause harm to the newborn, or due to consolidation of plague or combustion of fire, or for semblance, therefore cover that this stability returns to its natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And stop between them the enfused draps in rose oil so that they are not consolidated too much, and separate between them, or stop between them a thin layer of water under which is consolidated after it is covered.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if it appears that consolidation occurs in certain parts of the hand, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and is suitable for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the insertion of veins, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose and the veins are large and full of melancholic superfluities that come to the limbs of the body, and the greater danger is in their movements, and most of all in the movements of the itinerants and laborers and those who wear them.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	When you administer purification of the heart of black blood with some forceful excretions, and allow the patient to bleed from the basilica vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The second method of treatment for them is to incise and cut off that dark sin, and the other hand is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision of the sin is made according to this hand: first, start at the beginning of the vein, and when the dark sin is resolved, which is fetid from the vein, and tighten the vein at the end of the buttock, and place a sponge in the hole, or in two or three places, and make a wide incision, and then raise the black sin from the end of the vein within it, and open it on the juice, when the sin is completely removed and the times have passed that you want, and it will tolerate the virtue of the buttock.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then apply this, and command that he abstains from black blood-producing vegetables.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	When the veins are swollen and it is noted in the thigh, then proceed with incision.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	When the elevation of their limbs is second to this maneuver: you who raise the thigh, if it has any knots, and place it in the bath and rub the thigh with the hand that is wet from the water and the veins are swollen; or if it is exercised with strong exercise, if the bath is not for you at present, then enter that member is cramped.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And cut the cord on the right side of the vein in sections, either at the top or at the bottom of the vein, or at the base of the vein you must remove it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And open the cord with anunces and clean the vein from all parts until it appears at the feeling, and you must see the appearance of the vein that sometimes turns black due to the negro.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you cut and remove the cord, you see that white thing which is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place your hand inside that leg which is raised and is tight around the cord, and hold that one with your thumb.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And cut another section about three inches long and clean the cord from the part that is above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And raise that and insert it into the rear part of that bone, and pull out that and raise that within which is the hollow for the second section, and pull out that from the section that is over that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	When gout is felt, which comes from the section that has been sutured or sutures from all sections, and you enter it; and you insert your hand into it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you do not obey and extract and raise, you insert a needle of double thickness and tie it to that and extract the, or insert later the rope and turn your hand around all parts where it is stuck.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And keep in mind that it is not inserted; if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that hand and comes over the thigh for that reason.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that hand is outside the socket, you stop over the location of the submerged hair plague under the oil and unoxidized oil, and cure that within which is healthy.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein is twisted because of knots and not followed by straight ones as they have said, you cut that you push on all the knot part of the vein and the places of encircling of the vein, and suspend it above that when you raise that whole.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	You must pay attention to your section that has not been pierced by the vein and does not cause pain; and use your caution in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the injury that is cut is:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of a gout:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not the acute pain that appears as with the uncs or from the extremity per se that does not harm the vein; and it is of great flexibility, if it were subtle, would pierce the vein due to its subtlety; there are in it excessive thickness of the limb as they have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the changes on low-lying lands as in the Ategi in Arabia and in the low, dry lands of India with little fertility and where there is no grass or bush.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And very much it is generated in other parts of the body than the changes on the lands.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the management of it is of putrefaction that you see the spine coming out as venom from the snakes and toads and scorpions and vermin coming out between the spine and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	When the suspicion of the sudden occurrence of this vein that happens in the inflamed vein is strong, then the location is sutured; and the vein begins to leave from the location of that vesiculation which seems to be like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when it appears at the end, you should cover with your hand over that one a piece of cloth of the kind that is the horn of a dragon. Enter into it, and not on that one but on the horn suspended from the cavity.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many causes as you see in the parts of the body, cover with your hand over it and not on that one.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, then you should make a point on it and cut around it; and do not make that point if it is outside and inside, but if it is inside, then make it and insert it into the flesh and cause an abscess and gangrene in the place and ulceration bad.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	And if it is treated gradually and is extracted little by little, enter if it is outside the skin of the body and does not return to the body any cause in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	When this vein is found in many men who have a length of twenty palms and it has been discovered by me that one has more, it is called a varicose vein.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is discovered during the patient's treatment, you should insert the ray into the wound in the body and perforate that long wound in the chest, entering if all of this water is removed from the matter, and administer putrefaction to the area for a few days with medicines; and cure it with the cure of bandages.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein has some ramps, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it goes to that orrifice, and it is called a varicose vein, and it is found in many orifices.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And then cure that as they have said in the division and with this water that is given to them.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section, it is said that veins are generated under the skin and it is called bovine agony.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This malady is called bovine malady in the same way that our bovine malady is called because of the few veins that are found in the belly and the lungs, and it spreads throughout the whole body and devours, and it is shown to the feeling of the member in the member when the codon is disrupted and it comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of the child is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, and slugs, and feces in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the malice of him, that when he goes into the body and rises to the head, and comes out through the nose, if one presses too hard on it and enters and destroys the nose, then many unwanted movements occur.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to heal that and remove it, you should not do so if you do not have the ambulance and appearance of the member in your hand, and then cover what is over it and what is further away from it with something firm, and wipe it off and take out that part.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is inflamed in the flesh and does not bleed, then you should pause the cauterization with a hot iron on the spot where it hurts, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the member which corrupts the place as they have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that it has passed through the tip of the nose, then you should press on the upper part of the nostril with something firm, and wipe it off and take out that part. And cover that this member uses for the modification of the chest by medicines evacuating putrid humors, and keep away from things generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	When the body is divided for the sake of healing from illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is prevalent in our country, and it causes pain in various parts of the body, and it spreads from one part to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that which I recommended.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to attend a female patient in a village, and I found that her arm was swollen with a small inflammation in the funis vein, and after an hour, I saw that the inflammation had disappeared as if the silver had been removed from its place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain in that place disappeared and remained in the muscle, and it stayed like this for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And I corrected the other arm so that it did not touch the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I advised you to turn the entire body so that you see the other side; and it was too remarkable of the exchange of the body and the speed of the member in the member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And you had already seen that in the best parts of the body, following that maniac, but you have seen that those who are most in pain are transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	When I did not see that this was a man's disease as in the female.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	When I first realized that it was not a regular gout, but rather a specific type of gout called "gout of the female genitalia," which is characterized by the presence of many veins and secretes a pungent smell, it became clear that this was not an ordinary case.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that this curative remedy does not appear in those who are delicate and have humors of the veins that are not fully developed.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you wish to administer the curative remedy and the patient feels pain, do not immediately apply it as they have said, but rather strengthen the area and place your hand on the part and then cover it with something soft and gentle, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not see the wounds of the feet, apply your curative remedy to the affected area and expel the ventilated and excremental substances, as well as the pills of fetid odors and serapies and semblances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of seaweed.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Seaweed is diversified according to species and locations in the body where they are found, such as those with large points, petites, concave, and narrow ones, as well as those with three angles and those with tongues; and those with stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	When the second member or limb is affected, two pairs of forceps are used: those that grasp the principal organs such as the brain, heart, lungs, intestines, and testicles, and the bladder; and when it is necessary to remove one of these members from the body, which appears to cause death, you are advised to avoid it if possible, as the sweating sausage may be affected in those parts where death seems to be most severe, and if you do not see these malformations, and the sausage is not avoided in the depth of the member, you should remove it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the serum is affected by the sausage, and passes through the bones, and the skull is covered with the cyphac, which causes damage to the brain due to excessive heat, scotomia, vertigo, and fainting in the limbs, inflammation and weakness of the tongue, spasm and permixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the word is separated and destroyed by the abscess, and the voice is destroyed by the plague, and it appears to be wet white-like polls in the appearance, and the semblance is seen at a distance with the carn.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	If you see these symptoms in the patient, avoid the cure and extraction of the sweat, unless it comes out.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the sweat is found in the chest, it is likely that it is coming from the left side of the mamilla, and if it does not cause any pain, do not worry; and the movement of the sweat resembles the movement of the finger, and the plague is black, and the cold feeling in the extremities, and the sweating, and sincopi; and then you know that death is coming.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the sweat has caused the lung to become full of black blood from the plague, and the vessels that are closest to the collar are affected, and the color of the thigh changes, and the spirit expels great amounts of air, and there is an attraction for cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the sweat is found in the belly pouch that is in the chest, and the pain occurs in the small costas, and there is a great amount of vehement pain and spitting, and not all the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the stomach is empty, it is necessary to take a large dose of the drug to treat the diarrhea caused by an un digested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the stomach is empty and it remains in the stomach, and there is any pain from the plague, or the cloth, or the intestine that has been disrupted, and there is no hope for the removal of the stomach.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the stomach is empty and it is excreted in the bladder, and the urine is discharged due to any abnormal cause, and there is severe pain in the thighs, you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other parts of the body are similar to the face, neck, and groin, and the spine and vertebrae, and the shoulders and elbows, and the hips and knees, and the joints of the limbs, which are saved by the major dispositions when the stomach does not obstruct the veins or arteries and is not venous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And you recommend this to me that I have seen of the nature of these stomachs, so that it means for you about the cure of this.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of which is, for in a man there was a swelling in the lacrimal duct of the eye, and you extracted it from another part, then the grays of the auricle of the ear, and it became well and did not harm the hollow of the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	You extracted another swelling from a Jew who had it in the grays of the inner part of the eye, then the eyelid was pulled back, and the swelling was already hidden and not noticed by that one except for a small part attached to the eye root, and it was a great swelling among the sharp swellings of the Turks, and it had a leon's head in which there were no auricles.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Senate was the Jew, and it did not harm the eye socket.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	You extracted another swelling from a Crestian man who had it in the groin, and it was an Arab swelling, and that was the one with the auricles; and then you inserted it between two thumbs, and it was already submerged in the groin of him; and then you subtly touched it, and extracted it, and the Crestian became well.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another story from a man who was hanged in the stomach, and thought that he would die for that; and so, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred over him due to his dispositions, I examined the patient and treated him, and he was cured and did not suffer from this accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man who hanged a woman on his back, and the plague was solidified over him, and after five years, the woman was found in the crotch of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who hanged a womb on her stomach, and the plague was solidified around him, and it did not change in his dispositions during pregnancy, and the woman did not suffer from any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who hanged a womb on his face, and the plague was solidified around him, and the womb was solidified, not causing pain here, and it seemed to be like that.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the womb from the man of the first king who was hanged in the middle of his nose and had already died at the end of a short period, and the entire womb was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	When you were called to attend to the patient's case, it took three days for the swelling of the ankle to subside.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then you treated the swelling of the ankle with great care; then you inquired about that which was subtle, and did not feel it; rather, you felt a sharp pain further down, and then wondered if that pain was from the end of the ankle.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	Then you examined the location where the most attractive and digestive parts are located, assuming that this is the location of the ankle, as it affects that part.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Then you did not become concerned about the significant accident that occurred at the location; and you continued to apply pressure over it for several days without causing any accidents; and the swelling subsided, and the pain in the ankle decreased over time as you walked and felt the foot with your hand.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then you placed your hand over the acute, corrosive medicine for several days until it was fully digested, and you applied it to that part, and treated the swelling, and examined the ankle further down, which clung to the sole of the foot.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	When you have adjusted yourself in the abdomen of the plague for that acute medicine, after I saw the end of the sweat, it passed by my time as much as the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	E aprop pus that the plague was amplified, and I could enter the forceps into it, and remain there, and not increase in thickness, if you do not cease to subtly and invent on that maneuver of the engine over that am manieyras of engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, since that form of those at the end of the capitol, when I extracted it; and then restored that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	E alcus metges judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and you restored it and the plague was consolidated, and the thigh was healed for the whole health, and did not return to it in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	E yeu recomti to you the quality of extraction of some sweats that pauses this rule and has significance about this that I did not say, that is, the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in the narrative nor can understand those free.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The first source sentence translates to:
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	When you say that joint pain is not outside the members in which it is fixed, unless by two hands: either by attraction to the place where it is wound, or by the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	When that which is thrust into the place where it enters, or proceeds from flesh, and is then drawn out and withdrawn, causes pain.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not comply with the prescribed time for the cat, it is likely that you will lay it for several days until the flesh around it is desensitized and the attraction of the cat and its exit are overcome.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it seems that it has settled in the bone and does not comply with your prescribed time, you will lay it for several days and gradually desensitize it to the attraction and motion on each day, and it will eventually be withdrawn.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not comply with your prescribed time for several days, it is likely that you will lay the cat for as long as possible in the circuit of the seal in that bone of all parts until that location is amplified by the seal, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the seal has settled in the bones of the head and has proceeded into one of the hemispheres of the brain, and appears in the cavity of the accidents that you have told me, it is better to lay the seal alone for as long as it takes to be equal to the prescribed time; but if the seal is in the eye, it is best not to let it prolong its life.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the saw does not fit only in the bone of the thigh but also passes through the flesh, and remains in the wound for several days without causing any harm to the cause of these accidents, then you should pay attention to the insertion of the saw and the wound.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If a wound is bound and does not follow your extraction, you must administer remedies in the circuit of the affected area as they have been recommended, and properly care for the location once it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the wound is already inflamed in the location of the chest, and it is inflamed, you must investigate that cause, and if you feel that, you should attack that cause with those tools that are most suitable for the attraction of the wound.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it through the constraint of the plague and because of its length, and there are no nerves or veins here, you must then apply pressure on the plague once it is amplified and it is possible to extract the wound.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held by the hairs that are around it, you must cut through the flesh in which it is bound entirely; and then invent on this, if you cannot escape the flesh in the fracture of the hairs and in the turn of those that have come out.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the wound in every location where it is, you must use your own twist and forceps on all parts that pass through that comes out of that obstruction; and subtly use any subtlety that the wound is not cut and that it is tight in your difficult attraction of the wound and of that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot reach that spot in your time, you will have to stay there for several days until the parts that are on the circuit of the body become moistened, and then return to that place where you were able to reach.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you have any objections to the flow of blood, you will administer that which has been said for the cure in the capital.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue from the insult of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer medicine to the utmost of your ability to prevent the escape of the sweat; and make it easy, calm, slow, and firm as you can and as you have been commanded.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore you make the sweat to escape by that which is following the figure of that which has to be the caustic of the sweat in it, which is less useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not possible for you, administer that which is possible for you by the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	The sweat that is escaped from the opposite side of the other part, or that has been treated by any part of the other parts, or causes gilbosity of the sweat by the feeling of the part that has been pushed out of the cord several times; then you press on that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they seize with the forceps; and then attract it, so that it becomes slightly firm.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	When the joint is held in place, you should gently pull on the other side, and extend it as much as possible, and then pull out the hand.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If necessary, stretch it for a few days, and repeat it as needed.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the head of the joint is stuck, you should gently push it in that direction.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the head of the joint is broken and needs to be fixed, you should insert your hand into the wound, if it is too painful, use a needle to hold it in place, between the concavity of the joint and the socket of the joint, and then gently push it in that direction.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the joint is concave, you should gently push it in that direction, until the joint is fully seated in that position.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the joint is infected, you should cover the entire area with a cloth, if possible, and clean it thoroughly, and apply any appropriate treatment.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the joint is in the chest, abdomen, vesica, or costal region, and it is necessary to touch it, and it is possible to cleanse that area, you should cleanse that area and keep your hands away from it, and then extract it and close the wound, and if there is any discharge, apply appropriate treatment, and care for that area until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The first line can be translated as: "Form of forceps that are those which are sharpened at the tips.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	When the ends of their limbs are like those of a broom that are painful when we touch them with our hand, we should not ignore them.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And those are specific types of pain, large and small, few and many, according to the size of the limb and the tightness of the muscle, and the width of the joint.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of the push-pull cone of this end is similar to the pain of the other limb when it is stretched and the intestine of the limb is in it, and the impulse of that darkness.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of the push-pull cone of the dark end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like pain as if the intestine of the limb is stretched and is pushed away by that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of fleabite of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of fleabite that are usually fleabited are the ones that are most often fleabited, those that are in the head xvi, those that are in the auricles, those that are in the two temporal arteries; and those that are in the two lacrimal veins called aspicientz; and the prepared vessel in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and those that are in the collar; and those that are in the chin below; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and those that are at the end of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that have been cut in the thighs are seen, four of them are a cephalic, and it is necessary to use the wild rose; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is narrow, and is a migrian vein, and is composed of one ram from the basilica, and another ram from the cephalic; and that vein is called by the people "the vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic latex, and is named "citillar," and the vulgars call that the vena del ventre; and the funis of the thigh, and it is placed over the focil, and it is that in which the fleubotomy is done, and it is that which appears above the poutz for the manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between what is said about the auricular and the little dit, and it is in two rams.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot there are three veins; one of those is where the curvature of the wild rose's thigh is, and the second is sophena, and its location is the latex domestic's camba; and the sciatic vein, its location is where the wild rose's thigh is; and in the camba there are other venas resembling those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The cause of the inflammation is the blood vessels that are located in the navel, which are also known as hernias, and they migrate and become carbuncles and ulcers of the old neck.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of smearing those is what you recommend to me: it should be thin at the top of the thigh, and thick at the top of the thigh in the occipital region, where the veins are ample and good for stretching; then tightly bind the thigh in one place with a bandage that passes over the anus and the parts thereof, and in two places below the ears of the head; and if you want to do this as you said, and if you feel the ends of those as you said, here it is attempted.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	If you take hold of the harpoon, and that is the one that strikes, and then introduce that into that part of the vein that comes to the bone, you will hit the fleshy part.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand and hold the vein and the codon at their parts, and insert the vein where you inserted it before.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And is the length of the insertion the quantity of two fingers or around that; and you will feel the sinus as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten the powders and push them inside where it is cured.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already and previously at the beginning of the freeing, the insertion of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the arteries veins that are the templars' jewels, the advantage of the fleshy cut is to emigrate to ancient and evil, often sought and accumulated, and the course of sharp and abundant effusions at the ends.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of fleshing those is second to what you recommend to me: tighten the thigh, and as soon as you feel the arteries veins at the sensation per manifestly apparent and it is demonstrated that the hands of their ends the same said; and then you will see that.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If you have already lifted the patient's shirt to expose the veins in the areas indicated by the previous diagnosis, and inserted the needle at that point, and raised the vein; and inserted it according to the quantity of your need, then run the sanc second after the amount of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And remove the dressing from the thigh, and pause on the previous diagnosis about the vein for an hour, and pause on that part with cloth and powder and strain that is under great constraint, and leave it to heal within that part which is cured.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And if the memory of them has already been preceded by those that have been inserted, and the attraction has begun at the beginning of freedom.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the benefit of vein puncture on the forehead is similar to the vein puncture on the cranium for old wounds of the face and for migraines and spasms and unpleasant ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the vein puncture is according to what you recommend to me; so it is that this thigh is strained with a stick inside which appears the vein; and hold the instrument which is called the fossor of which this is the form of you:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point that is on the tip of the fossa over the vein and percusses over it with the thumb or the other cause in the manieyra of the patient, and let the sanc run according to the quantity that you wish; and remove the perforation of the thigh and strengthen that inside which is cured.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some incisions are made if it is necessary to open the fleubotomy lat, but do not cover that the fleubotomy is not sharp like the others, rather it is of a blunt end, and the fleubotomy is second to the transversal, four bones are removed and forcefully cut in it the fleubotomy when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The beauty of the two veins that are the lacrimals of two eyes for scabia of the eyes for rogor and sebol in the eyes, and the malauties of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the fleubotomy is that the thigh stretches the col sieu am one benda, and the fleubotoma those, and you should be standing over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	If the surgery is made according to the transverse section of a longitudinal one, which is not meaty; and if the flebotomy is done subtly, then the end of it is cut off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	When the patient's pain is at its peak and they are under your care, stop running, hold their legs, and stretch them out in a certain way, and then remove any restrictions on them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Many of the symptoms of nasal bleeding are attributed to acute fever and violent sweating, as well as skin diseases of the face, eyes, and lips, and especially when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the nasal bleeding is that the throat is stretched and the patient holds their nose with their left hand, and the fleubotomy is held subtly long and placed at the tip of the nose on the second right side of the nasal cavity, where the vein does not feel any sensation, and where the pulse begins to flow so much.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover that you recently made the patient's throat smaller and smaller and ran over the pain according to your need; and then apply it to that area for a certain period of time, where it is gradually restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Many of the benefits of nasal bleeding are that it helps to constrict blood vessels, prevent the onset of leprosy, and treat various skin diseases and infections, as well as corrosive ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the abdominal incision is that the abdomen stretches out on either side of the incision; and the surgeons should be on the head of the abdomen, and the abdomen should be placed on a sheet.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And the abdominal incision should be as long as the abdominal incision is small piece by small piece; and it should be extracted from the second portion of the flesh, and second time if necessary that it is required to be, and it should resemble another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And the incision should be made in the muscle and stretch the veins in the stricture of the uterus so that the abdomen does not become distended, and let the wound enter the mattress where the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of the abdominal incision of the veins is that it causes small postings and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers in the nose and in the circuit of the body.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the abdominal incision is that it strengthens the abdomen when you open it, and stretches the thighs of the patient with a needle, and turns the lips of the patient and looks at the veins of which one is on the left side of the lip and the other on the right; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of the nose, and it is less in the circuit of those dark veins; and then inscribe each with an inscription.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have any doubt, and do not know which of those is the case, you should understand the majority of them, and the manifest signs of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	When it appears that the veins are swollen in the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary for the veins to enter the lip further.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	It is customary for the veins to enter the tongue further, which is similar to the flebotomy of the head, at the glabella, at the uvula, and in the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of flebotomizing those is that it follows the mouth between the teeth, lifts the tongue, and looks further at the tongue, from one side of the vein and the other, and the color of each is turning black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then flebotomize each one; and keep in mind that you do not end the vein when flebotomizing those, because further away from them are the arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are flebotomized in the thigh are customary for all men, and the flebotomy of those is done with two hands, or use a mirror or a small instrument for subtlety; or use a mirror and a ruler, and this is the shape of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This sentence seems to be discussing the appropriate method for making incisions on specific parts of the body, taking into account the width of the veins and the stricture of those areas. Here's a possible translation:
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	This line seems to be a phrase or title, possibly referring to a specific medical procedure or technique. However, without more
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	This line appears to be describing a medical procedure involving the opening of veins that are full of blood and appear large, and also those that contain clotted blood. The phrase "Forma de fleubotomi mirti" from the previous line may be related to this procedure. However, without more context, it is difficult to provide a precise translation.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the form of the olive gallstone:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This small incision is of less latitude and has a subtle extremity, and corresponds to a small vein subtle that contains some subtle citron.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	When the improvement of the basilar vein surgery is mentioned, which is one of the three veins: it extracts the blood from the lower parts of the abdomen that go to the knee and the chest, and from there it nourishes the intestines.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And the flebotomist, when performing the flebotomy, should guard that artery and be over-themed in it, for if he errs and adjusts the puncture of the flebotomy, it will injure that artery and cause blood to flow, so that not to flebotomize that artery before flebotomizing, he should cut it at the same level.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilar vein does not appear manifestly, you should cover that and move to the other, or circle around some ram you have; or perform the flebotomy at the end of the arm where it is manifest; and cut that after the flebotomy as they have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want to perform the flebotomy on the metheglin, you should cover the stricture of the arm that touches the location within which you know the location of the fingers, and place it over the one that is needed; and tie the arm and cut the vein with a concave cut by the flebotomy according to what they have said; and be careful that the percussion does not hit the space of the artery's location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see that the limb is tense, inflammation occurs in the location you have observed, and it expands the artery, and therefore swells.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If the blood flows in the wound during dissection as if it were golden water, and you perceive that it is from the artery's blood, and you cut and place your hand over that part for a long distance; and then remove your hand, and if the blood lets out, four streams of blood will let out, and you should hold the arm tightly and press on that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	You should guard the patient's leg from the wound and keep it covered for several days after the surgery to prevent infection.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the wound does not heal, and sometimes you are not able to seek medical attention for a long time, you may need to clamp the artery yourself if it appears; or if the extremity is swollen, and it is swollen, and press on that area with your hand and hold it there over the location of the vein that is causing the stricture and the pulvis for another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the wound heals, that is good; and if not, you should treat that which precedes the rememoration of the location of the abscesses that have formed from the dust.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The removal of the wound of the patient is difficult in positions that are not suitable for the small location of the plague and the possibility of the limb of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Sometimes the removal of the dark vein is the best way to extract the wound from the sublingual part of the neck and to the posterior part of the chest; therefore, it is composed of the ram of the basilica and the ram of the cephalica, as they have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	When the knife is held over the patient's shoulder in the incision of the knife, four are the nerves; and if it adjusts to the point of the incision and crushes the nerve, it will cause the patient's stupor, and it is difficult to cure the patient, and the less he is cured, the more this nerve moves; and if it is hidden in the chest of some men and is subtle and not shown, you should cover the knife with your hand when you cut the incision with the one that you cut with, and avoid the nerves with your strong hand.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, you should find the vein in length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of the cranial vein incision is that it relieves head pain and consolidates the maladies of the eyebrows.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And if you want the knife to pierce the cranial vein or the facial vein, then this is the blood saved from all the veins, and it is not shown the artery nor the nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	I agree that you should perform the fasciotomy that you have guarded, for the fasciotomy does not puncture the tail of the lizard just so, and surrounds the location with a cage, and does not notice it if it is not atrophied by the first percussion that is over the fleshotomy some eyes.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is more likely that the patient is mistaken in some cases, when the fleshotomy is not performed in the first percussion, and does not notice it in the next one.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the fleshotomy of that and the accidents of its use, in which you should consider the correction of those, is more important than the fleshotomy itself.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of the qualities that you should know is that fleshotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for hope of the patient and caution from the occurrence of maladies, and that a proper fleshotomy is in one of the veins that are in the thigh, it is: cephalica, dark, and basilica; and that a proper fleshotomy at the beginning of the first day, after dinner, and in autumn, when significant signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This is because the cold humors cause inflammation and swelling in the affected area, leading to pain and discomfort. The condition is often treated with rest, ice, compression
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, if the condition is not properly managed, it can lead to further complications and discomfort. This is why it is important to seek medical attention as soon as possible, whether it is during the day or at night, in any hour or any time. The doctor may recommend various treatments, such as medication, physical therapy, or surgery, depending on the severity of the condition and the patient's overall health.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	However, if the condition is not properly managed, it can lead to further complications and discomfort. This is why it is important to seek medical attention as soon as possible, whether it is during the day or at night, in any hour or any time. The doctor may recommend various treatments, such as medication, physical therapy, or surgery, depending on the severity of the condition and the patient's overall health.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	However, if the condition is not properly managed, it can lead to further complications and discomfort. This is why it is important to seek medical attention as soon as possible, whether it is during the day or at night, in any hour or any time. The doctor may recommend various treatments, such as medication, physical therapy, or surgery, depending on the severity of the condition and the patient's overall health.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I will try to guess what the text means and translate it line by line into English:
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	E aprop considers in subtlety of humors that cause this, if the joint is swollen, with redness and heat, and if medications are available to alleviate this.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	When entering the bath, if no one forbids it or is exercised by a certain exercise to make it subtle,
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the fleebotomy of the day's pain, so it is time for dinner, as they have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And tell me that this pain of that day should be guarded in that day of all animal accidents, as it is anxiety, anger, fear, and all corporal accidents, as it is labor and unnecessary suffering and pretense for them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his seat, the causes should be present in the use of the which is customary for men to have aroma and odor and to have balms and semblances as after the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the fleebotomist on a cushion that is placed or if that cushion of the one who should be fleebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And extract the hand, and press that on his arm with his own hand, and stretch the limb with the fleebotomist's three veins; and stretch the muscle with the corner and involve those veins.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	If the stricture is treated, that is, if the stricture that does not engulf or the stricture that is superfluous, you forbid the flow of sweat; or it is a mollification, and you forbid the body's heat.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And it seems that the stricture, that is, if that which gives the appearance of a fleebotomy presses on one's own limbs between them as they enter, and that the veins are inflamed, and are declared in the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the fleebotomizer is made of the same kind of bronze that the fleebotomy is made of; and he stops the fleebotomizer on the left side of the vein, over the place where he wants the fleebotomy to be, so that the vein may slip a little, and the percussion is set aside as much as possible of the veins which are most affected by the fleebotomy, and of those which are full of ventosity, and when you pause the fleebotomizer over the vein, and the fleebotomizer is released, it does not strain the vein, and if it does, the vein is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, in order that this forceps may be stopped and be found in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	When you have paused the incision, if the vein is easily bleeding in one place, stop; and if not, continue to another vein nearby or over the area, if it is not too swollen.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the place is too swollen or the thigh is stiff, you should massage it for a day or two, and do not stretch the limb too much, as it may cause inflammation or discomfort. Do not force the movement, but gently stretch the muscles.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	If necessary, repeat the incision if the blood is flowing well.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the incision is small and bleeds slightly, and you fear that it will not stop bleeding with the amount you need, continue the incision in the same direction and adjust the amount of blood in the incision a little at a time, and if the place is swelling, you should make smaller incisions.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	If the place is already swollen, do not continue the incision, as there may be no reason for you to do so; and pause over that part of the saw, where the hand of the saw is, and listen to the pulse of the patient's arm.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	When it is better in this place than oil and the others.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	When it seems that the patient is suffering from gout, which blocks the veins of the corset and causes swelling in the chest, and when one of those parts is placed over the area, the corset subsides and turns around when it becomes large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a large abscess is formed in the area of the thigh cut, and many pustules appear, and especially for that which has not been blooded except by that pustule, or in the spasm of the small vein, and you open it and place your hand over the area, wetting it with water and salt, a few cloths, and then press on it for an hour, it will be dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And so that the cut does not worsen further, complement it with the vein of another vein or with another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If, after several days, there is no improvement in the area, do not worry; and if you want, place your hand over that cause of a cold or mire dissolved, or a cause of sweat from the mentastre or calamine or semblance of the one.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	When visible movements occur after the appointment and prominent symptoms appear, a basilica-level surgery is required.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	When you have finished opening the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, then pause your work there and if you find that the compression you made over there is too tight, it is likely that blood has flowed from the artery sanc.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply here what is recommended for the pain, so that the place becomes endurable, and apply care to that part in the other treatment when it is cured.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And cover that part with what comes from the sanc to all men according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color that appears in the sanc, and then apply it.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the sanc is black, then you apply it within when it is red; and if it appears to be large, then apply it within when it is subtle; and if it is sharp, then within when its sharpness is removed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And cover that part which is large and hard and requires the extraction of sanc in a vein, where the fleubotomy of the vein is amplified and the fleubotomies are left open.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	When one is in the cold, it is best to have the opposite, and cover that with warm trousers, and make sure that the leg is straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	When the best treatment in vein thrombosis is administered, it is better to make a transverse section rather than a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This manicure for vein thrombosis is saved from blood loss and nerve injury, and it is praised and saved as a successful vein thrombosis treatment at a later time and place.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And it is customary to perform a small incision for fleibotomy, and you should use a small amount of infusion in one or two milliliters or simple saline; and extract the blood in three or four vessels.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a need for complications, you should take infusion through the fleibotomy into an escarpment of mirra or an escarpment of aromatized honey or in an aromatized escarpment with specific aromas such as cinnamon, ginger, and similar scents, or in an aromatized and odorous escarpment.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if there is a need for sincopi of fleibotomy, and it is caused by the scent of blood, you should know that you take in the urine of meat and an aromatic escarpment subtle; and use aromatics to some extent, and be sure that the pain is at the same level.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	When there are other causes mentioned in the division of the head of the sacrum for evacuation, use those other causes.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	When the arm is to be cut and the vein dissolved by a second view, cover the part of the vein that undergoes the fleebotomy for motive evacuation, and the virtue of the vein is frenetic, which evacuates the sanc little by little, so it is after the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	When the arm is to be cut and the vein is dissolved by a second view, and the heart is strong, then make the vein pass through approximately seven hours or nine of the first fleebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	When the vein of the heart is to be cut against the direction of the part where it bends, cover that it happens on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When the heart is already cut and is sharp and sore, and causes fever, cover that the vein of the heart is cut in one view and is cut with great quantity and is amplified the apoplexy when it happens; and you will have preserved all the conditions of fleebotomy; and you must hold your hand over the corps of the vein to prevent it from dying in place of sincopi, four views later when the fleebotomer is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	When you want to slide the arm and remove the second section of the sleeve, as the wound of the vein is closed and the pain is difficult to bear, then press it with great force and bend your hand over it, as this causes too much pain.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	If the wound is second-degree; or if there is much pain at the acuteness of the wound which coagulates the sac in the vein; or if you pause over that with tympanic alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress that with a leugierament within which the sanc is outside and out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is gangrenous, then press that and do not touch within that gangrene which is sedated.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if it is necessary to remove the sac secondarily, and not excuse, then you press that over that place or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "the thigh's cord" is lanced in place of the black or the basilica, when it is not hard or thin, as it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the incision in the leg is that it introduces the doctor's hand into the wound, which then encloses the vein and makes the vein visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	When the bandage is placed on the swollen part of the limb, and the incision is made along the short transverse line, not horizontally or along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And is the incision wide and is your fleebotomy the one you make on the joint of the other leg, a little?
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you repeat the leg in the cold water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you would excuse the repetition of the leg in the cold water, and the month would pause the blood flow in the water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the fleebotomy of this vein is saved that of all the other veins, four hours later it has not been pulsating nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the fleebotomy of the knee joint is compared to the maladies of the foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the fleebotomy is that you strengthen the leg with a limb or with your own, as you have placed it in cold water, when the vein is inflamed and is demonstrated at the same time; and the incision is made along this transverse line; and if not all are not noticed in re.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	When preserving the wound, do not leave it until the last moment, for if you wait too long, the nerves of the wounded parts will become bare of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And if you iterate the wound in the tail of the serpent and let it run the sand through that, if you do not iterate the sand in the tail of the serpent, the sand will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you extract the sand according to the amount of necessity, place your hand over the vein or sal, so that it is not solidly consolidated; and it seems that you will do this in all parts straight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The advantage of the wound of that part of the wounded leg is that it is similar to the diseases of the thigh.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do it in the wound of that part of the wounded arm as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the vein section in the wound is to those diseases that are in the part behind the arm, as it is in the more severe diseases, and in the diseases of the nails and ulcers of the thighs and old cushions, and they resemble those diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the fleurbotomy in this case is that it allows water to enter the body and flow over the friction point where the veins appear; it also corrects the joint of the foot with a pointed cautery; and the location of the vein should be marked with the same point, and it should ramify in the face of the foot's heel.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, use a wide ramus or the cushion for the thigh, and place the talus there, as it is better and will allow for more comfort.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you perform fleurbotomy on the face of the foot, be careful not to touch the nerves that are located there, and pause your fleurbotomy at the point where you would like to insert it, as if you were inserting it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And so, may your fleurbotomies be successful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If the use of sinus is prohibited, then you should remove the foot from the water and let the sand run over that entrance where it has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the fleurbotomizer goes off course in the first cut, then you should repeat it at a different point, where the location is safe; and do not fear the malicious one, only be careful of the nerves as they have been told.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	When it seems that the other foot has a tongue (glossitis).
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	When from the sciatic vein, the location is where we have said you must leave the tail of the horse in the wild part of the cavity.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the advantage of the gout operation is that it relieves foot pain when cauterized.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the gout operation is that it enters the wound, and quickly and firmly constricts the thigh muscle of the wide part within a certain distance from the tail of the horse, which does not appear except for this reason.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, you should make the gout on that second incision that is as possible and the next vertical one, and it is better; or if you are making it through the skin or through the flesh, the location of the wound is salted.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is used by many men who are skilled; and if you cut it, and it does not appear at the sensation of everything, then make another incision on the thigh, and that which appears in the two of the foot next to the big toe and the little toe.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let the cauterization run the amount you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And if you want to relieve the stricture and place your hand on the site of the incision, so that the wound may heal.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of wind and the quality of the food you eat.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Wind is of corn, or of ears, or of hay.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And wind is caused by certain manure: one of them is a scarification and the extraction of sanctuary, and the other is a ventilation of their scarifications.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this wind that is made from their scarifications is caused by certain manure, which can be of dung or of manure.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the winds that are made from their scarifications and the extraction of sanctuary are fourteen parts of the body, of which one is in the part where the wind is placed, and the other part is the lower part of the neck; and the wind of the lower jaw is below the mouth; and the wind of the spatula; and the wind of the alohoster, and over the anus; and the wind of two fires, and two brands; and the wind of two cavities; and the wind of two holes.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	A venepuncture does not extract blood except from the thin, scattered veins in the flesh, and therefore does not harm those, as it is done through phlebotomy; nor should it be considered that a venepuncture is a fire or its flame within any other joint that becomes inflamed upon the removal of which the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it causes pain due to inflammation or continuance, apply the cure at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the same place and at any time that it may be needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is those who, in whom the blood becomes multiplied when it is needed for venepuncture and disappears in the part that is most serious and sound; and of those that disappear by evacuation and weakness in their face and in the part that is most serious and cold; and of those that disappear with fever in their face and in the front, with bluish color and dullness and sluggishness and heaviness in the limbs; and of those who lose the place of their venepuncture; and of those whose blood becomes multiplied; and of those that disappear by taste in their mouth, or by the tongue being postponed and spitting out blood; and of those who sleep is multiplied, and of those who have blood in their sleep, which is weak, and plagues and other causes for their appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	When, in any case, and especially if it is in the third or fourth month of the month, then, as you command, I will make a point that has passed through the day of two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	When the windpipe of the neck is affected by gravity, it falls into the head and descends to the feet; moreover, it is believed that this is an evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This wind is in the location of cephalo-tomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not necessary to use that which is of cold complexity, or in the quality of catarrh, for that great benefit.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it is not necessary to use those vials, and in the heads of those who have bad skin rashes.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Moreover, it is believed that if one continues to look at that, it will cause forgetfulness; and therefore it is necessary that you command the wind to pause its suction for a short time in the parts where it was, so as not to generate forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Moreover, windpipe of alchemist is in the location of cephalo-tomy of the black vein and the basilica: and therefore it causes asthma, and the constriction of the airways and the scissure of the sternum of the airways, and the throat, and the evacuation.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When the windpipe is blocked with a small piece of food, and if it is not removed immediately, it can cause weakness in the chest and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The windpipe of the gallbladder is responsible for causing accidental pains in the head and neck, as well as in the eyes, ears, and temples; it is instead located in the area of the abdomen.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the windpipe to stop pressing on its own, instead using scraping, so that it does not insert the artery and cause blood clots.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The windpipe can cause alcohol to be left in the mouth, as well as corruption of the gum, and a resemblance to the symptoms of diseases that are present in the mouth, and it is instead located in the area of the abdomen.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The windpipe that is placed on the teeth with spoons can cause causticity, which is made by repelling heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The windpipe that divides the teeth of the fingers can provide good results for the fleubotomia of three veins, which are located in the abdomen, black and capillary, where those arteries are placed that are present in all those veins, and those thin veins from other veins that are placed inside when the attraction is on the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When commanding the ventralist not to make too much incision, that the location is stripped of flesh, and then his nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It is a wind that is used to blow over the thighs and confesses to the blood of the buttocks and the ulcerous pus further.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And order that the ventralist be a great wind, and that it be of earth, where the location requires a deep cut; and very much the subtle winds are scarified in scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Many winds of the small changes per manifestation, that they irrigate the whole body, and confer comfort to old pain of the hips and the uterus, and the vesica; and provoke menstruation, and confer comfort to bothor and ademil; and stand in location for fleshotomy of doas sophenas, and alahorcoben, and doas cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	In the meantime, it depresses the whole body and makes sinciput in some men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the winds to alahorcoben the juvenation is predisposed to the juvenation of the winds of the small changes.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the windpipes is such that they pause the windpipe at the beginning of the view and succumb to well-timed temptation, and do not prolong the position of the windpipes, less pause those slight moments, and return them strongly, and that the humors come to the place by unexpected arrival.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	When you do not cease to apply this and continue until you see the wound has become inflamed and swollen, and the gangrene appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And you scarify and repeat the small incisions one by one, and consider in the position of the chest.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Fourthly, that person who has flesh of rare parts, know that you cut one vein and do not plug it, so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the veterinarian to enlarge the incision and make a small one, and facilitate the wound.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If in the wound there is much swelling, know that you cut several incisions, and the first one should be made to the way of subtility to the wound and its transparency.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Less in the second to the examination of the extracted wound from the wound.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the wound is very foul, make sure to cut the last incision so that you can drain the pus.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract the wound little by little or a small one, a single incision is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If you wish to perform a surgical extraction, make a deep incision; and if we found that this wound is large, then cut through the area with a well-made incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "scarification" in which the depth of the wound is determined solely.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If that of which the wound is rough, dark, and narrow, then cut so that the holes for the vents are larger and more open; if it is in summer, use almond oil or oil of viper, or oil of chamomile or cinnamon; and if it is in winter, use narcissus oil or oil of lirine, or oil of camomile, or of the sanc, and make them like that.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the excess is large, cut it off, and if the oil is dark, use olive oil, or balsam oil, or almond oil, or anise oil, and make them like that.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the vent is large in size and has fleshy tendons, cut so that oil is not allowed, and cut so that the holes for the vents are as far away from the vent as possible, using water, or water mixed with soap, or water with alum, or water with chamomile, and make them like that.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	When it comes to the matter of gout, wash your hands with water that is neither too hot nor too cold, or with water that is sweet and has a scent of rose or lavender.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	When it comes to the matter of excessive fat, wash your hands with water that is neither too hot nor too cold, or with water that is sweet and has a scent of rose or lavender. This will have a soothing effect on them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And cover the wound with a bandage; having covered it, make sure to keep it moistened for about an hour or for a few hours, and make sure that the wound is not dry.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done before cleaning the wound of a person who has had a bloodletting?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Before cleaning the wound of a person who has had a bloodletting, consider the following: if the person is in a state of anger and has a hot sanc and inflammation, then you should take cold causes such as vinegar, honey, and sage, and apply them to the wound. After that, you can add some water and let it sit for a while, and then apply some ointment or salve.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When the patient's movements are calm and their breathing is shallow, and their veins are thin and transparent, it is a sign that they are in good health.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if the collection is free of obstruction, it is a sign that the patient has plenty of urine and that they are able to use it moderately, and that their movements are not obstructed by urine or feces, and that they do not have excessive thirst or hunger.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And if during the day of vomiting and diarrhea, urine is greater than the amount of food taken.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And if urine is given in some hours to adults with typhoid fever, or muscle relaxants, or alcohol, or at any other time during vomiting or diarrhea, so that the main limbs are comfortable and the sickness is alleviated; and it does not matter if they drink water.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Moreover, the vomiting that is caused by his scarification is vomiting that has been stopped by his stomach, and over the heel and big toe, and over the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the pox of the wide one, so that these members do not suffer scarification on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	When it is not desired for the sake of pleasure of the member, but for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief of pain in the member, and for the relief
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And when it has been placed over the thighs when they become weak or sore, that for the sake of pleasure one may obtain softness and remove the soreness from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	When it seems that you are standing over the knee and the table, you must be careful in those surroundings.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These views are managed with great care only; and some views are managed with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some views are managed full of water in the wounds of the table.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that's why the view is expanded and is pushed out, it's water or water in which the herbs are placed according to what is convenient for this.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of view managed with fire: the width of the orifice is twice the size we have formed; and the quantity of the preon is the largest of a palm; and it is in the middle of the, in the location where it is in the circuit, the largest of the, the thread is small second the quantity that enters into it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	The pain of the joint is made of rose or lemon, large margins, lion, teeth and thick because you do not lead the member to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if it is at the midpoint of the transverse cross-section of rose or iron, where candle is placed in the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	This wind is much greater than that which has been recommended; and the fewer men who are needed for this surgery, the better the patient's condition and the easier the operation.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The winds of the infirm and the debilitated are different from those of the young and robust;
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of pressing this wind is to focus the fire on the member that extends the flame of dry wood gently with a little wax, and place it over the edge of the thigh transverse in the edge of the wind, so that the fire is ignited around the part where it does not burn the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And if it is placed over the thigh of the patient, and it is said that it is over the truss that has been told, then when you have the winds and do not indicate that they are in that truss, and that the vapor is on that truss, the wind will be so dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And you should light the fire according to your own hand, and repeat it if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	The less wind there is in the illness of plenty, and without transverse or truss, and not maintained but full of water, and placed over the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the method of it: And as this wind increases, so does its benefit, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	The text you've provided seems to be in an old form of Latin or a language similar to it. Here's a possible translation into English:
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	When it comes to the quality of using those that you have found bloody when they are in the clothes of unclean women.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And if their menstrual periods are long and painful, and they do not experience any discomfort in the abdomen of those; and if the uterus is evacuated at the beginning of the operation and of the vents; and if the thighs of the patient are frigid, then:
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to succor the place with the wind, it is less dangerous in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Otherwise, wash the place with the wind that agrees with it and is moved by water; and it should be shaved and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the belly of the patient is prolonged by the caginess of the bloody puss, and it becomes thick, then you should dip a cloth in the clean water and place it over that area to prevent the thickening from coming out.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the patient multiplies, you should powder over the vitriol that has been made, or guards and resemblances of its causes stigmatic, within which the patient's abscess is; or they are placed over the place with the legs of peas that are excocized, and they are frigid within which the peas stick to the place, and the abscess is closed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	When necessary, if there is a need for a bloodletting procedure, change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then pierce the location with a needle or insert a thorn in the areas that are safe to prick; and after that, pull them out, taking care not to prick any sacred spots.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want to powder them, sprinkle a little of aloe or salt, or ashes, and then blow.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Now begins the second part of the text: from restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary for the art of medicine; and it is a restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, wise that you understand this chapter is full of false claims and vulgar words and those who do not pay attention to the free books of the Ancients or read only one letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this manuscript of the scientists in our land is private; and you have not been obliged to do so at any time, and I have not admitted that afterward, except by long study of the free books of the Ancients and knowledge of their understanding, within which I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And accordingly direct your attention and studies to the length of life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	When I first began to describe in this chapter all that my own science and the knowledge I have gained through my own experience contains, I thought it was appropriate to open this to you and relieve myself of the burden of writing; and I opened it at the end of writing; and I presented it at the end of declaration; and I formed it in various forms of the stitches that I administer in that place, as is done with addition of declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Capitol primier. - This line is not in the provided
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium - This line can be translated as: "Summary and collections of bone fractures.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	This passage is discussing the importance of understanding and following the instructions in a medical text, as it contains valuable knowledge that can help those who are wise or eager to learn this noble art.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	I say that when an injury or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs, you should first apply a bandage or splint or tie to the affected area, or else use any other means, if nothing prohibits it, as best as possible with virtue, or if it is that which caused the injury to be severe, or if it is due to old age, or if it is due to strong heat or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let it be filled with herbs and meats of rabbits and hares and rabbits; and forbid fatty meats and fillers if they fill the veins with sinews, since you are sure of no apthema caut, and if you fear effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And return the thigh to its original position in the first course of care that it usually occupies.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the bone begins to be restored, you should ensure that the thigh is not nourished with innutritious foods of little and heavy nutrients, as if your foods were flour cooked in water, and milk, and beans, and viscera of cows, and honey, and fresh fruits, and gross and similar to those, and this diet is made to produce coagulation of fracture with lemon and honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	1. You know that bones crack when they are in men and women of the first vitality and the elderly, and the elderly, if they are not continued and solidified after their nature due to the drying of their members, it is impossible.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	When they are consolidated and continue to follow their nature over time for the drying of those members, and they continue to become more solid and firm as the bones of the small effects, so do the bones of the little finger.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and covers over the cut bones of all parts, seemingly like glue that grows thicker as it adheres and strengthens within what has been conglutinated and linked, within which venom is present and fermentation, as if fire at its beginning, within which any cause does not prohibit that from being one of its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to place cushions under the thighs, cushions in which gravity and viscosity and heaviness are found, as has been said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Different types of fractures depend on the part of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	You know that the types of fractures are different depending on the part of the body, and a fracture of the bone in the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone in the head; and a fracture of the bone in the chest is different from a fracture of the bone in the other shoulder; and seemingly all other parts are different from these.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	When I remember all the cases of fracture, I will explain the distinct case of the capital one.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	When there is a variety of fractures in the body, it is called a dislocation.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	When there are different types of bone fractures in the body, it is called a dislocation. There are arcuate fractures, fractures at the ends of bones, and some are fractures according to the length of the bone. Fractures of the shoulder and hip and dislocations can occur, as well as plagues and disruptions in the head, and small fissures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each species is engaged or tormented in the restoration of the body according to what was remembered in its distinctive locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Dislocation of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this, the fracture of the bone is known: its twisting, and of that prominence, and its appearance to the sense, and so of it when you comprehend that with your own hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is no twisting apparent in the location and it does not hurt, you do not have to touch the bone with your hand when it is agitated and the thigh does not suffer much pain, you do not have a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is a knot or a small fissure, but not necessarily that you can untie it with your hands alone, and no compression of the entire area; there may be some pause over the medicine of those that remember at the proper moment in that place, and perhaps a straight path for subtle stricture.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	You know that when it is arched and does not split into two or another, without any accident in its swelling, as the whole part of its appearance remains, you can cover that there are some things that come from your time for correction of those that happen to apostema caut.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it happens to apostema caut, you should leave that for a few days until the apostema ceases; and after that, engulf that second hand that you can lift and disengage.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You know that the restoration of it and the washing of it is pushed by a slightly different one than the one that happened in the place where the swelling occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And you should tighten that second hand that comes with the rememoration of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If in the bones there is swelling, you may need to extend this member cut into several parts, if it is the foot or the knee; or if the member is small, or if you use a cord and a string or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	When your position is at the place where you pause the member in its natural position, while the parts that are extended from the member are turned, you should pierce with a perforator that returns those addicts to their original shape and according to each manyer that can be found in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And keep in mind that you should not harm the patient's thighs with your operation or injury; and pierce them according to the strongest power you can apply to one bone compared to the other, in better forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And at that time, profitably touch with your hand at the part you are working on, and if sometimes there is a different cause, adjust it and bring it to its right position according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And equal extenssio and compression are needed, as wise physicians do when they make words seem foolish to patients by their operations, or make contraction in the member as they have seen by their operations of the words of their patients.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And connect the parts, make equal alignment and proper operation and stricture of that member, and relieve and tranquility; lay the patient on their side and make them sweat that does not harm that in the hour of their vigils and of sleep, and see its revulsion and agitation, and must void its excrement, and must all movements be secure to all of their virtue; and wait until the position of the member is a position at which the pain caused by it is not felt when it is in the disposition of the member's position or injury; if you notice that the member is turned to another disposition of that one which does not feel pain, and keep in mind that the position of that one should be dry and engaged, so that the member does not become twisted when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	When it comes to the quality of the stricture of the quiet member, that which you recommend; because you know that these members are differentiated in their appearance and size and in the shape of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	When those who are small as the arm and elbow say and seem to be like those, it is necessary to cover the envelope with a thin silk.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those who have large thighs like the thigh or calf, it is necessary to cover the envelope with a hard and durable material, such as leather, which is connected to the big member and strengthens it in that part of the body, as if there were no gap.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, begin to empty your evacuation, place the cord conveniently according to that, over the location of that fracture am three or four times the member's size; and strengthen your hand with a small one on the cord.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then, hold at that place at the end of the location of the fracture, and strengthen your hand with a small one on the part that does not stretch the member's stricture where you have strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then, stretch the envelope of the location of the fracture a little, and soften the stricture little by little, until you take in one large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And take another needle and cover that other vein over the location where it should be enclosed, and see if the enclosures at the end of the fracture; and your operation will be in the stricture of the enclosure and in the mollification of that second one that they have said in the first enclosure.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And pause between the feathers of a lion's stop or a drap that is engulfed in the tortuosity of the fracture, if it has tortuosity; and if not, do not pause in it for any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And pause over the other needle, and engulf around these enclosures that are faytantly falling, if in the location there is no inflammation or post-cautery apostema, and you pause over it that sede the apostema of that and that oste the inflammation; and layssa that per alcus jorns; and you strenh on them the stelhas.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And are the stelhas of the canna lada raza, and they should be formed in a savvy manner; or are of fust of pi; or of ramps of palm; and is the ample of each stelha according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	I do not have the first source sentence to translate as it is missing from your request. Please provide the text you would like me to translate.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	I do not have the first source sentence to translate as it is missing from your request. Please provide the text you would like me to translate.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	I do not have the first source sentence to translate as it is missing from your request. Please provide the text you would like me to translate.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	I do not have the first source sentence to translate as it is missing from your request. Please provide the text you would like me to translate.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	I do not have the first source sentence to translate as it is missing from your request. Please provide the text you would like me to translate.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	You should know that it is not safe to cut all the limbs at once on the first day; the cause of this is that the limb is too large, and it does not heal quickly unless it is covered with something for about four days or seven or more days, according to your own experience with the onset of gangrene.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the type of plasters that the ancients used for mending broken bones and dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The type of plaster that is most suitable for the treatment of fractures, especially for the thighs and hips, where it should not be heated or wet: and that is made of powdered flour, and the marrow of the flour which you must use to move the bandage in the grooves of the flour.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And how it is done, but you should not use that for the thick album, and place the confection of it without pressure nor subtlety; and use that instead.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another type of plaster for the treatment of fractures and dislocations: recipe of assafetida, of lavender, of acacia, of unguent, and migrach, which is made from milk salvage, of all parts of the drac. x; of honey and aloen of drac. v; alochil of drac. xx; all the thighs and hips, and cribellatz and mesclatz of water alichil or of album of huou if the composition of the plaster is scalfed; and use this plaster, which has a good composition and restores fractured bones gently, and confers comfort to men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	This appears to be a recipe for a poultice or ointment used for fractures and sprains. Here is the translation:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	This text appears to be a medieval medical treatise discussing various medical procedures and treatments. Here's a line-by-line translation of the given source sentence:
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	When applying a plaster to joints and bones that have been separated from their original positions, and when there is pain or fissures and fractures: hold the linen bandage tightly and submerge it in warm water with oil, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This product is not suitable for rejuvenation, but rather for the removal of scars and expulsion of painful sensations.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another type of plaster that restores fractures: use fresh fig leaves and saffron leaves; mix them all together to make the plaster.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A plaster openly administered for the restoration of fractures of bones and when you want to resolve the inflammation of the plaster: take aloe, camomile flowers, and violet flowers, flour of ers, all parts except the tip and stem; all should be cut and tied with string, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is not scalded, cut that part with fresh water from the humid colon of the patient or with clean water.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another type of plaster that is quickly effective when the first one does not work for the removal of painful sensations caused by inflammation: take aloe, semen of li, and balsam, majorana, violet flowers, camomile flowers, all parts except the tip and stem; all should be cut and tied with string, if possible, with water from sauze or douse or cold water, depending on the quality of the member and the color of the skin.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May's Yopocras does not say that a cushion must be placed over the tense member for the restoration of the sinew, but rather wax and olive oil, and no other cause; and it advises that there should be a balance between magnitude and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	When Gualia was seen to have been pressed upon the member that had been cut off in the restoration and the causes of which were those that cause dryness in the body, which is similar to the heat of the fire, and resembles those causes that have been recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Recipe for a plaster that soothes wounds and pain: use mortar made of lime, grounded marble or horse hair, and salt, divided into parts; it is pressed and baked and becomes plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The more the quantity follows the quality that covers the wound and is divided, the better, because you consider if there is no pain, no excitement, or the limb is not cut, it is not suitable for its place, then you do not need to use too many pieces.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you feel pain or excitement or inflammation at the location, then you should stop or remove that piece at the time, and take away the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take some aloe vera and moistened seaweed, and submerge that in warm water, and let it wash the location where the excitement and pain cease; and after a while, lay down to rest the member for an hour; and then place something over the wet seaweed in cold oil or red oil, and leave it on until you are sure of not having aspirin, and that the inflammation of the member has subsided, and the pain has been relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then it is appropriate to apply that stricture subtly and thinly, and gently press on the part that is healthy, and subtly apply it so that it may be beneficial.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if sometimes the affliction and weakness, pain and inflammation, and all other accidents have become common to all, and you are advised to apply ointment and stricture, then you should apply it as you have done at the beginning of the circumcision.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no accident occurs to the member from those that have been said, you should not remove it for less than three days or four or six; and some are completely healed in twenty days after your departure, as they have said, within which time the fracture adheres, and it settles down to the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And you should adjust the stricture to be less than that of your first stricture, and reduce the intake of food from the patient's thigh, according to which is preceded by the rememoration of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Then if you sometimes find the place of the fracture has dried and thinned more than it should, you will know that that nutrient is prohibited to reach that; and then embrocade that water with the saliva you have observed there, and let it be in total for three days; and then apply a small ointment to the stricture, and for this operation, give nourishment to the member, and it will heal.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When the fracture of another bone that was not properly restored at the beginning is not corrected by covering it, and then by tortuosity, it is an error in the operation of these, and there is great fear, and if it is not treated promptly, the ankles will become larger and more vulnerable, and they will be more likely to be affected.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have not seen any of them do this, so it seems reasonable that this does not work.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Secondly, on fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are blows, and their figures are different, and their causes are distinct. Four types of fractures are considered as direct compression of the skull, and the compression comes from the entire bone entering into the cranial cavity, which is then removed with forceps, just as in the case of a fracture at the fist, and for this reason this species is called dislocation; or the skull penetrates a part of the bone, and penetrates the flesh and does not pass through the penetration to the back of the bone; and this type of fracture is called complete dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	When the plague of these fractures is great or small, and those that are contractional or tractional; and the cause of their pain is from burning or chafing on the skin, and to them it seems.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture or penetrates that has already approached the periosteum that is now the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	When a bone is broken, it is healed in the bones, in the subtlety of the small hair, and therefore this kind of broken bone is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This fracture is caused either by crushing or by blow to the bone and appears as if it enters any layer of the bone into parts of the digit, and it is caused in the concave part of the bone where the bones split when they are hit by the force and the part that enters is divided into parts of the digit.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This happens mainly in the bones of the human body, as if they were cups of eagles.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these kinds of fractures are thin as if they were separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find relief for all of this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you can identify all these kinds of fractures by detection over those and by inquiry into their tendencies and the fatty tissue that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is identified by what is discovered on the bone, and it is removed, and it is limited to the tendency of the bone, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	When treating fractures, it is important to consider the patient's accidents in the lower body, and you should pay special attention to signs of manifest symptoms such as vomiting due to choler, extinction, loss of understanding, abscess of the vote, sincopi, acute fever, edema of the limbs, and symptoms similar to those in major departments, and the doctor's treatment may not be effective.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you sometimes encounter accidents that are not related to current events, it is a sign of good health. If you wish to begin the cure of the patient,
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is known if it comes to you in the beginning of the disease as it is, and that is in the days of winter, as you study in the bone of the hip on the day of twelve seconds in a certain position.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If in the days of summer, you cover the wound with clean cloth on the seventh day, having known that the bone is now corrupted by the bandage, and that accidents may occur due to this.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has already penetrated the bandage and covers the brain, and is divided into small and rough pieces, you should cover the damaged and torn parts with clean cloth, as recommended to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	If it is that your race has plagued the thigh, and you discover over the bones according to custom and with your hand as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it is less on the thigh.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you suffer from bone fracture, loss of blood or appendicitis, you should apply the remedy as recommended to you, and if it is saturated with drapes infused in vinegar and oil, and fascia reduces the inflammation within a short time, and you are sure of the loss of blood; and then start in the circuition of the bone and in the ablation of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the second maneuver is that you insert the needle into the bone as straight as possible, and this is the form of it: And then administer another needle into this, a small push point that is; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply the appropriate amount of scissors that was previously measured.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And if you have several types of scissors, each with its own blade, and the others are shorter but sharper than the rest, and they are made of iron or steel; then use them according to their length and sharpness.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily by striking on the scissors with your finger, without cutting the head and causing damage to the blade.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bones are hard and strong, then use them by drilling through the circuit of the joint you are administering the scissors to, the ones that are called non-penetrating tarsals.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And do not call them anything other than those that do not puncture the end of the bone as much as possible, for those that are on the tarsal, make the edge or margin round or like a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the spindle of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these tarsals, which are suitable for the spindle of each bone, as long as the end of the bone is sharp, the quantity in length and breadth is second to the quantity of spindle of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of thermal travel: The quality of piercing in the circuit of the cut bone is that you place the thermometer on the bone and rotate it according to the time you know that the bone has been penetrated; and appropriately move the thermometer to another location, and pause there until it covers the entire amount of the size of the ray or environs.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And appropriately insert the scissors there that is between every part of the bone, and make it subtle that you can over it to prevent levitation, as they have said, when you radiate the bone, or if your hand, or if another cause for some sturments which will appear at that place, as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the scissors do not touch any cause of the cipher.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when the bone is perforated and separated from the cipher if continued to it, and you extract it, be careful that the rays and turns of that are in the sharpness of the bone that is in the cipher are not similar to scissors, but rather be careful that it is subtle and the other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If you come across any small fragment of bone or cartilage, take hold of it with ease and as necessary from the sturments; and then treat the wound with care and find out which ones have been injured.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other hand of the operation is longer, about a foot, which Gualia made and laughed greatly; and this is the saying: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you discover the fragment of bone in the place where the fracture is very strong and very manifest, when you will have discovered that part and will hold the end of this slow and glad inscissori of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	E is that the lenticular fragment is like a lion and does not cause any cause, and the acute fragment is in two layers ahead in length, as many times; that the lenticular fragment should be adjusted to the cipher at the face of the acute one on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E if you cut over the incision of a piece with a small mallet when all the bones are inscribed, and you are sure that the pandect is not involved in the accident you fear in this hand, and if the physician14 was the fool of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If any cause annexes to the bone of the patella in certain places of bones, it will be located at that part of the incisive lenticular, and will be delivered at that part of the incisive nodules and paors.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the patella, and if that which is separated or remains in the bone is the face of it, and there are sharp and subtle roughnesses on it, then you should cover those roughnesses and serrate those subtle roughnesses with rasps of various quantities so that you can possibly administer those to all locations with convenient push-pus and the push-pus of the next according to where you lose your operation of that cut bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And cover that you administer in your ratio with the one that rasps the bone at the beginning with the subtle push-pus of it, and use the subtle push-pus of it, and do not stop giving it continuously as you pass to administer the push-pus of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	When in any of the other small fractures or subtle breaks, follow the care you used for this one to correct the position.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because none of them were anesthetized over all those who studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And so we have written about this in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the splint is tightened when you reduce the bone, you should take as much cloth as there is of the swelling, submerge it in warm olive oil, and place it over the orifice of the swelling; and take another folded or tripled piece of cloth and submerge it in warm olive oil and place it over the original cloth and apply pressure on that as you can, without squeezing the limb too much. And administer to that bandage, and do not strain it only by quantity, but by the amount of swelling.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And apply this remedy for one or two days after you are sure there is no apoplexy; and then remove it and administer medicines as needed from those that are superfluous, such as linen and flour of errors, powder of ensels and of aristotle's baths, and similar substances for those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is necessary that you make these powders of this medicine finely ground and dry them over the plague; and generally, they are administered in this entire medicine of which it is free from poison and does not cause harm.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep in mind that the plague in your cure is not net; and it should not be in its surdity of engaging or another; nor should virulence be added to it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and dries it up there, and it accides upon the thighs accordingly with that malicious malignancy.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the forehead of the head, as the bone of the skull is sharpened when the cure for the head is applied and becomes blackened in its surface; and therefore consider that if it happens on the thigh accidents that have been told, you will know that it is all true.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not become blackened but from the medicine that has been placed under it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that it becomes blackened, you should know that you take one part of honey and three parts of red olive oil, and apply those lines over the forehead, and place that over the forehead; and then cure that with the specials of the cure that are suitable for when it is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	I apologize, but I am unable to translate the source sentence
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	This line can be translated as: "Of the restoration of the nose when it is cut." In the context of medieval medical treat
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	This line can be translated as: "You know that the nose is not cut, but rather made up of several pieces, or one of those some bones, which has two ossicles, where the part you have is cartilaginous, and is not cut, nor does it happen to it, but rather has atricio, tortuosity, and sinuitation." In other words, the nose is not a single piece, but rather made up of several parts, including cartilage and bone. The author is likely explaining that the nose should not be cut or severed, as this would cause damage to these delicate structures.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	This line can be translated as: "If one of the pieces of the nose is cut, you should know that you must introduce the little piece into the nose, and close the fracture with the tip of the instrument, and with the point opposite it, so that it returns to its natural figure." In other words, if a piece of the nose is cut, the surgeon should be able to reinsert it into the nose and close the fracture with the tip of the instrument and a point opposite it. This will help to restore the nose to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	This line can be translated as: "And it is necessary for you to facilitate this by your hand, and remember that you do not close for your own operation on the thighs of the patient." In other words, the surgeon should be careful not to close the incision during the operation on the patient's thighs. This could potentially cause complications or injury to
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper lip part of the nose, and it does not penetrate to that point, then you should cover it with something equal to the end of the ray in which there is a small growth.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in multiple parts, you should make the appearance of this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And in the first day of the fracture, if possible, make restoration of it; and otherwise, take about the sixth part of the cauterized area for the repair of the apostema.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And if you enter at the end of the nose a meca of drap with li, if the fracture is in one part, or metz doas calguas, if the fracture is in multiple parts, and it is in the gross calgua as much quantity as possible to fill the nar of the nas.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And I advise the ancient restorers that the calguas are wrapped in border, and they are moved every day, not seen by me; having known that the meca is wrapped in album of huou comfit as powder of moli; and layssa the qualgua inside when the os is firm and endurazita the cartillage.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some veguadas are inside the nose, in place of calgua, pain of auca pus that is enveloped with drap of li leon; and it is that you have the fracture of the nas pus vehement and that the malaute not is prohibit of inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, make it, and if you wish, make incisions.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If another wound occurs after cauterization, apply the plaster to the nose or cheek where it is most sensitive, or apply a damp cloth.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If no wound occurs after cauterization, you should cover that part with flour and powdered essence of ensel, and place your hand on the leopard's stop, and do not touch the nose for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If you break or fracture a few bones in the nose, you should cover them with cloth and remove those instruments that are appropriate for them; then close the wound, and cure it with what is appropriate for it, whether it is cornea or consolidation, and apply plasters as needed.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If a boil occurs on the nose, you should cure it with what is appropriate for it and administer intravenous solutions of plasma as needed to make it completely healthy.
Capitol .iiii.	Capitol. This is likely a heading or title, not a sentence to
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not a boil, observe whether the fracture is deformed only, and not torn in two, and is curved in parts of the teeth, then your diagnosis should be lighter.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	When the fracture is in the front part of the limb, you should introduce the left indicus into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the mandible, you should introduce the right indicus into the mouth of the patient; and press gently on that to facilitate the reduction of the fracture, on the other side of the fragment of the bone, on the patient's own bone of the opposite side of the fracture, in the same manner.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the mandible fracture is already separated into halves, you should cover that you are administering extension of parts on either side, according to the right line, as soon as it is possible to achieve equilibrium.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you happen to have a concussion of the teeth at disruption, you should tightly hold those that seem to be the most important, such as gold or silver or lead; and place your hand on the broken mandible, and on the double drape, and on the large cushion gently, or a piece of sole of your shoe according to the length of the mandible, and then apply it in the same way that you have adjusted the splint and that seems to be most suitable, as soon as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	When ordering the patient to use rest and tranquility, and to stop eating the foods that cause stomach upset.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you think that the figure has changed in any way, then you should cut and remove it on that day; and then correct what has been altered and add powder of milk, album of honey, or flour of cinnamon, which you would have placed on the wound, and place over the plaster leopard skin.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when this plaster is anchored and adjusted on the bone, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, which will not come off until the patient is healed and the fracture is strong; four weeks later, this fracture will be straightened.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another accident of gout occurs, then you should administer the medication that has been prescribed for the four weeks that the patient is healed, and keep that gout under control.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is infected, you should consider if it is due to the bone being separated or split, and then you should subtly remove those sutures that are appropriate for this wound in the removal of those from the stitches.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the wound of the plague is straight, then you should enlarge it according to the quantity of your need by cutting it with a knife.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have finished stitching those wounds and if there is no remaining infection, then you can perform the amputation if it is necessary; otherwise, place a bandage over that one of the dressings that suits best and covers it when it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol v. is not a complete sentence, but I can
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada translates to "Of the restoration of the shoulder when it is fractured." This suggests
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, and that fracture is made in one of the three directions. This means that if the shoulder bone is fractured, it should be treated by aligning it in one of the three possible positions (anterior, posterior, or lateral) to ensure proper healing.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Quar o es trencada, o seperada, or es separada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua. This sentence is quite complex and can be translated as: "Either it is broken, separated, or it is separated into two parts that do not have suture wounds; and it is easier to restore the restoration of the shoulder; or it is possible that the fracture occurred in those wounds, and it is difficult to restore the restoration of the shoulder; or it is possible that the fracture is
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In the operation in that case, when the fracture is found to be displaced, it is necessary for you to have two assistants, so that one holds the assistant and follows the furcula trenched, and the other extends the collar ves to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And if the fracture is found to be in the direction of the second form as described, and it is not in its eminence nor concavity, then...
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you wish for extension, it is necessary that you place your hand over the thigh bone, whether it is of wool or linen, and according to the size of your need, extend and raise the furcula and cut the spere at your own discretion, following the fracture in the direction that was described.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you are unable to pull the end of the furcula to the desired parts, then it is necessary that you place your hand over the thigh bone, so that it is straightened over the hip, and hold it over the muscle of the leg with a cushion larger in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The minister presses the muscle of the patient on the parts that have entered until the bone of the clavicle is raised as in the preon, and you correct the fracture and reduce it to those that say.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain in the clavicle and stiffness, then cover that part with something and take out those stiffnesses for ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, you must insert an incision of the patient with one of the incisors that you have seen on this, because you had paused earlier the clavicle the sturment that serves the cipher; and the sturment is made of flint or iron of which this is the form of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It seems like the cut is of the kind of cook; and it is the latitude of that which you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thickness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should be according to what you can reach in the operation; that there are ends aways and one end is wide and the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the plague that you inscribed when you extracted the joint from the bone is wide, and it is certain to cause an abscess, then you should adjust the corners of the plague with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, then you should cover the plague with strips and powders according to the size of the plague's cut.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If an abscess occurs, then inform the patient that you will apply a dressing of ointment and oil, and stop there.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the tightness of the bone when it is plagued and separated is that you apply a plaster made of flour from the album of the yolk of an egg, and stop there on the leon stop, and also stop the sponge, so if you ask for it, and also pull out water, so that it is not long, and its latitude is like a palm or near it; and also apply double powder on the leon stop and the plaster; and take a small table of subtle quality where the latitude of it is three fingers and in longitude similarly; and wrap that in a plaster, and wrap that drap around the stela in the location over the fracture location; and also moisten it as you can, and roll it over the collar of the leg and both thighs, and also roll it over the titillic of the leg and both thighs, and reduce it over all parts, and when sometimes the tightness of the fracture is tighter than the stricture, and it is clear that it is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	E tot, that no harm be made to the pelvis bone; and for this reason, that every day you see the womb, when the ligament is softened or you have already made the pelvis bone harmed, then you rectify this and strengthen the labia.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then pause the fall of the patient over the chest, and pause further the pillow of the head so that they can sleep on their side in the bed with a small cushion; so that the helper of the patient's shoulder is elevated from the shoulder of that one, and thus the fracture of the acromion is raised to the muscle; or if the arms of the patient are by the collar of that one.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not unwind the bandage if it does not occur in the right place or abscess, enter within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And if you have seen the face of the patient's head, and adjust in the closure and restore that and let enter when it is restored and the fracture of the acromion is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it becomes stronger and more comfortable every month for twenty-eight days, and some are made in the time of that man.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol, Chapter Six.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of the shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is cut on the side of the shoulder and not cut except for the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	When the location of the bone is cut — and it is cut in the middle of the bone — and it is not known unless touched, then you should follow that the figure of the fractured bone shows you the preparation for the bone and reduce that figure to its natural position in the entire curve of the curve that is as possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place on the powder of finely ground almond and lemon; and then place a powder of double-dyed cloth; and then place on the flat side of the subtle table according to the quantity of the spatula, either a little or less.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the table is now concave in the corners of the spatula's points, then you should cut that concave with lemon, and it may be equal to the table.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then stretch the wet long part under the constraint of the table and enter it between the fixed parts so that it is not tightened to the place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the limb in every day; and all seen that it is softened, another seen and stretch it and hold the stela equal to the table if it is tightened to the place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When the patient's leg is placed on the table, it means "When the patient's leg is placed on the table.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spoon is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	When this number is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and you know certainly that it comes from the bones of which the beginning is not doubted nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you proceed to the location of the knee and wipe away the dressing, then cut over it and remove it, and then follow what has been said in the fracture of the femoral head of the hip joint if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the hip joint fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The hip joint some bones are broken in their place and then they are scattered; but the ends of the bones that are not chipped are still intact.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the hip joint is broken, it often happens that the fragments are inclined towards the parts of the dentary and cause great pain, difficulty in locomotion, coughing, vomiting, and intense fever; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of the hip joint is that it is placed on its side over the opposite thigh, and a cushion is placed between the spots of the bone; and the muscles are pressed, and the ribs are adjusted to the most comfortable position for both ribs, and it is handled subtly in the operation and afterward in the movement that can be possible and convenient, until the figure of the bone returns to its former shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place your hand over the plaster and stop and rest on the table of fine sauce or of a brush and of those that resemble it in lightness, so that you wrap around that in cloth; and then finely place your hand on the cut bone that is not rough; and apply pressure along the back of some veins, and tighten that restriction evenly; and then consider the plaster throughout, and when it becomes soft, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If necessary, cause the affected part of that corrosive or prickling, pain, or gout to occur in that place, then cut and remove that and remove the plaster and rectify what happens according to your medical care for the hand; and reduce the plaster if it sometimes affects the face; and adjust the stricture within what is healthy.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of the ribs when they are twisted.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large locations where the two sides meet, and from the ends of which nothing happens to those contractions unless it is due to those cartilaginous ones.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	I know that the patient is not anxious about the feeling of the inquisition of the doctor's hands.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	When the restoration is done as follows: the fracture is closed with the thumb of the left hand, entering it from the side that is broken, and pressing and tightening the cut bone with the thumb of the right hand, if directed by the doctor.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is inclined towards the division of the ribs, you will experience severe pain in the back and puncture, as if puncturing that which has bled, and for this reason the bones are placed in a gauze; and there will be difficulty in healing, coughing, and vomiting of sputum; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The first line of the text translates to: "Indeed, the Antixs were engineers in that particular art.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	When it comes to the matter at hand: cover the patient's thighs with pillows to prevent inflammation and swelling, so that the abdomen is flat and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the proper positions.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should know this for the purpose of not causing unnecessary cauterization, if possible; and if it happens, help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They should be told to close the wound as soon as possible and as tightly as possible; and it seems like reasoning, but it is feared that the wind may drive the superfluous air to the location due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They should be told to cover the wound with lint that has been soaked in ointment, and place it between the ribs, ensuring that the incision is closed when filled, which is the lip that closes when the second part is pulled back; and apply it to the patient's abdomen for the treatment of gastric pain and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the abdomen is severely constrained and does not suffer, and the doctor punctures the membrane with the needle, be afraid of the abdomen, and cover the wound with something over the location, discover the torn costa, and then remove that instrument that preserves the cipher, the memory of which is preceded, and that inserts the bones easily, and extracts it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	When it comes to adjusting the mouth of the pus, if it is large, apply heat, and cover it with a plaster once it has healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have a wound from poison ivy, then cut the cloth and put powder on it with red olive oil, and place it over the area to cure the wound that is causing the poison ivy.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	If you are sleeping on the bed where the disease resides, then go inside and it will be cured.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of a spinal fracture of the two and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some people have fractures of the bones of the neck, and they are affected by the same spinal column as the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when you want to know if it is cured or not, consider that sometimes the wounds are less hard and stupefied, and dead, and cannot be made up, extended, or stretched, and when you tie them with strings or punches, and do not feel any pain in them, you know that it is not cured, and in the months of dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If those painful and sharp points are made on those constrained parts, you should know that the nucha of the bone is preserved and that the leg rarely suffers from infection.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it is healthy or not, consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that the patient has become soft, look at those who are affected in the same way and when you touch the abdomen, you feel ventilation and defecation of his will, and some women have their genitals covered over the abdomen and cannot urinate, then you know that it is mortal and should not be cured in the patient's care.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If you do not find any cause for those, the cause is better and leaves more room.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The cure of the patient is that you perforate at the seat of the apoplexy caudex that you place over the vertebra that is red or pink, or as you wish; place over that some women's eyes and a few days later, some women's eyes see that the apoplexy caudex is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And you stop one of the plasters that are comforting and existent, and stretch over that with your hand; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not sleep on the part where the pain is before it becomes healthy again.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If something happens to the hip bone or any other cause that is already separated from the body, you should cover it with a cloth over the abdomen and keep those bones; and if possible, adjust the lips of the wound, using stitches if it is large; and if necessary, care for that area with an antiseptic solution, entering if it is sane.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the hip bone is cut, and the end of the thigh is exposed, you should cover the left hand of the opposite leg in the anus, and tie the cut bone with the other hand as possible; and place your thumb on the plaster and bandage, if directed by those, and tighten it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel that the hip bone is cut, you should apply a bandage on that area, remove it, and care for the wound as part of the previous treatment, entering if it is healthy.
Capitol .x.	Capitol. This is likely a reference to a specific chapter or
De restauracio de la ancha.	De restauracio de la ancha. This line translates to "Of the restoration of
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the thighs are often broken, and if they break, their fracture is not only a communication at the extremities but are inserted in the longitudinal axis and decline to the parts of the dentition; and things happen to the pain in the body and puncture, and the camba is stupefied when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of the joint is that you extend your hand over that which is above the fracture, as shown in the figure of the hand.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is at the end of the limb, simply, you should cut along that second line which appears to you as equal by equality within which it is similar to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is at the end of the leg, which has already declined into the parts on the side, you should place the table over the patient's stomach within which it is prepared for you to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have cut along that line, place your hand on the plaster, and place your hand on that frame of paste or nail, and press firmly over it, fearing neither puncture of the fracture nor movement of the staple.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And cut along that second line which is equal to the one you are pulling out, and order the table to lie over the stomach or to expose the side opposite it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If you have an attack of gout, stop extending the limb and its restoration until the attack of gout is sedated, and place your hand on that second line which follows that one which precedes it; and return to the restoration of the limb and press that arm as hard as possible.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you happen to injure or break your bones, you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	1. The text is a medieval medical treatise written in
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	1. De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori. translates to "Of the restoration of the fracture of
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	1. Adjutori is what is between the thigh and the neck of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	1. And if it is cut, you should restore the restoration of the bone in one of the two hands, of which the one that you hold is the one that is most suitable for this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	1. They are tied in two ends of the cord, and then they are hung up from the raised place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	1. And follow the patient on a bed; and then let go of the hand that is cut over the end that comes to the top of the shoulder in the place where the curve of the thumb is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	1. And then hang over that cause, or the master extends it to the parts outside; and then the surgeon and the fracture should be treated as much as possible, within which the fracture returns according to its cover.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other hand is that the thigh be placed over the cervical spine and suspend the arm of the collar of the limb; and accordingly command two ministers who one of them holds that it is out of order with the fracture of his bones; and the other holds the pus further from him; and then extend this to their parting.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the extension to be strong puddle, then hold on the fracture of the bone and on the other bone, and then the two ministers extend to their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then hold that the pus is placed over the tendon and the other further from the fracture, please take the coil.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture is near the coil, then hold that the pus is placed over that place and over that tendon.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Uncover that ease and work on it, and according to how much is uncovered when it is covered and applied in good application, hold that ease and if it does not cause strangulation of the cauterization, then strengthen it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you have an attack of cholera, relax the stricture on the seventh day, and place your hand over the wet and red part that has stopped the attack, and continue to hold it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The hand that holds it is what you apply plaster to over the fracture, and place an envelope of cloth around it; and adjust your arm over that assistant, and place your hand over the surgical wound.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and hold on the assistant's arm with your hand so that the arm is in its proper position, if not prohibited by any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place the splint over the fracture that is pressed and fortified with other splints; and leave a space between each splint of one-third of the total length, and the length of the splints according to the break.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And hold on the splints over the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the treatise.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your stricture over the location of the fracture is pressed tightly.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	When the fracture is slightly open, it is called a "stricture.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	If you sometimes notice that the situation of the pins and the stricture is as they said when you restore the member to its original position, then you must do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear an asthma attack, then you should loosen the stricture and the pins as they said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And after three days, consider the liament in all parts to prevent inflammation or swelling from occurring at the site; or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to the excessive stricture; and then rectify everything according to what they have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are concerned about not causing any cause for this, do not dismiss the ligament unless after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And is the patient's lying on the side of the abdomen over the right shoulder, and the shoulders are more on the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the full stomach of the lamb, and consider in the whole hour of the night or day that the figure of the cut member is not faded or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, then rectify everything according to your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And pause the diet of the patient according to the order that has been given, in such a way that the diet is gradual at the beginning, and increases as it progresses; and you cover that you add more food to the diet.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four common symptoms of the assistant and the patient's constitution are that they become stronger in 40 days; and you cover that they become weaker and are administered food and medicine, and are cured by those who correct them.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is already open, you do not close it with that ligament and staples within a few days or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called the ulna; of which one is small and that which is pointed, and the other is large and that which is left from the pointed one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And very often it is cut the larger bone, or the smaller one, and very often they are triturated.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	When the small focus is cut, you restore the skin of the area, and the surgery is pushed back a little.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When the focus of the bone is cut, the fracture of the bone is bad, and the surgery is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And it is bad when those bones are cut.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is cut is small, it is convenient for the surgeon to be present, and you should restore the skin, making it a little longer for ease of insertion, as it may be torn.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the bone is large, it is best that you make the cut longer, and push the skin further with great force.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both bones are cut, you should make sure to pull out the extraction as hard as possible.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you should make sure to restore the figure of the face, and extend the extensive skin over a cushion, and place the parts of the face in their positions, and say that all other words are as follows, and the mouth is placed below the other words, and the throat is on a pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	If a cushion is placed under the patient's thighs or chest, so that the hernia does not protrude.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arms of the patient's side, either to the side or to the front, and another minister extends them in a similar manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the surgeon cuts the bones that enter the second better figure that can be.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the bone's structure there are sags, then you have to drill a hole through the entire thigh in the correct location for your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If there appears in the separated sack that punctures the noose and is not what you expect for the restoration of the thigh, then you have to do something about it and leave that one behind the other hand that they have told you.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is not in a good place, and I have already done this for another similar case, then take the care of that one.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you have an apothecary attack at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line a cloth with a certain amount of olive oil and white wax, and it should be more precise and subtle, and press the cloth over that subtle opening when the apothecary is ceding; and then remove the cloth and stop applying the prepared powder from the clay of the hooves, and stop stapling; and that staple is the one you should leave on the fractured part that has been made large and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You know that the number of the shoulder bones in the larger positions is not in a single fracture or in two fractures.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then stop the tightening over the location of the fracture with great and violent force, and when less extirction is made from the parts of the fracture or from the lower parts of the limb, stop the tightening a little sooner than the rememoration of the head of the caput.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that envelop the fracture are soft and not hard or abrasive, and it is the one that is most suitable between subtle and large, as they have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member and its limb for a short time.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If you meet any cause for which rectification is necessary, act as soon as possible, and cover the member with wet cloth until that excitement ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	See that the member does not contract within which it pauses, and then return the tightening.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the extriction has already been softened and the bone has been reshaped to resemble those, then you should correct everything with your own virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	When considering whether the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, it is customary to use a poultice that softens that part a little each day until it runs into that member, and then firm it up.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the joint does not happen to be caused by any of those that have been said, then you should not think that it will take more than twenty days or around those to be healed.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And if you hang the joint of the knee up by its own movement of movement, and make it sleep on the right side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or in xxxii days, or rather in xxviii days, and then it is followed by the position of the complexes and the positions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of fracture of the thigh bone and of the toes.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that in the thigh bone and in the toes of the foot there is fracture, and it does not happen to them but by violent movements seen.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when fracture or dislocation happens to the thigh bone, you should know that it follows the knee in its fall and that the leg is seen second in equality, and you should stop the joint of the knee on that extended one.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The minister extends the broken bones and the surgeon pushes them back into their proper position, as good as they can be repositioned.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And if you do not stop the bleeding with a plaster or bandage, it may happen to have an abscess; and then stop pressing on that part according to the amount of the wound, and you have already wrapped it in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the splint is in the joints of the fingers, and you make it look like a glove made of cloth, and command the patient to hold their hand with the splinted finger against their palm; then make sure the cloth is long enough.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the cloth is held on the hand with the splinted finger against the palm, and the thumb is applied to the cloth; then hold it tightly.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the joints of the fingers, you should stop pressing on the cloth and another part of the same joint in the palm, so that the hand can be bent and turned; and then release the pressure, as it is wrapped around the nail between the fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a fracture occurs in any of the toes of the foot, if it is necessary to cut through it, make sure it is narrow and fasten it with a thread at the base of the toe and around the nail, then stop and leave a small piece of thread on the side that is raised and not sore.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any other toe, follow the same procedure as in that particular location, or in the index finger, ear, or anus, and if all goes well, it is better; or stop over that small piece of thread, as they have said in the knot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and as you have already done, the disposition of the cauterization and opposition — as in the previous operation — I believe that it covers when any cause occurs of those, according to the narrative of the one.
Capitol .xiv.	Capitulum XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Chapter XIV on the restoration of a bone fracture of the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the thigh are cut open and declared to the senses according to what converts them to the parting point and the swollen pubic bone.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the body is made in such a way that one limb is placed over the fracture and another limb further along the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach with their face down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The surgeon extends the entire limb to its full length according to the quality of the bone in the location of the fracture.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If the joint is close to the neck, then the limb should be placed directly against the point of the hip, so that the extension affects it, and the other limb continues the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the fracture is close to the neck, then the limb should be placed directly against the point of the shoulder, so that the extension affects it, and the other limb continues the fracture.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The surgeon aligns the bones as much as possible within the joint, reducing it according to the similarity with the natural position and the bone is conjoined by good conjuncture; you cover the joint with plaster and stricture, unless it happens to the member itself.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it happens in the joint, then you must remove that for a certain number of days until the swelling disappears and return to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The stricture of the patient's pain is that it covers over the fracture with a hard wire, bends it into two or three folds, and remains in place; and it envelops the socket within which the toe enters and the end of the toe.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Then insert a long pin between the thigh and the socket of the joint, and bring the ends of the pin through the corresponding openings of the parts on either side, and wrap them around the socket and thigh as much as possible over the hard wire.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place your hand over the thigh at the location of that broken bone, and place one stone on the bones of the socket.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the spaces between the socket and the calf with cloths, so that the stricture is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then begin to make a strong bandage over the location of the fracture with three or four folds, and as few as possible, your bandage will be stronger and hold better.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend the ends of the pin to the corresponding parts on either side, and tightly pull the ends of the stones of the other part so that the bandage does not come loose from the desired location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	When you apply the structure over that part, it is understood that it will not affect the corroding or gouty joints nor cause inflammation or swelling; and if it affects any of those causes, then cut off this part from him, and correct all that happens, according to what has been said by the wise.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If the knee is painful in the knee, you should know that this is possible for you; otherwise, cover that part with something and rest it, and cure that which follows the remembrance when it is healthy.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And some wise men advise that this fracture of the thigh be treated with another method that is adjusted to the patient's condition, as has been said in the adjuvant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the patient with that method, it does not cause claudication in the thigh; and if it is restored alone, or another cushion is applied to the other part, you should know that this one must be claudicated from the one that is hottest.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the thigh is tightened for fourteen days or a few months or a few months, and this is entirely due to the diversity of the complexions and other compositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone of the neck.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that a fracture of the collarbone of the neck is usually caused by a sudden blow to the head or shoulder.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture is not caused by a sudden blow to the head or shoulder, it is usually a crack or split in the bones, and this causes pain or discomfort, and everything is affected by this sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of the collarbone is usually done in such a way that it is held together as much as possible, being reinforced and adjusted according to what is possible for equilibrium and ease and convenience and production.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And apply plaster and place it over that round surface, if you need to; and tighten it as much as possible according to the strength of the material.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the positions that have been recommended for other fractures, and see how to apply caution and similarity to those that opposed this accident in order to be healthy and safe within what is possible for this collarbone.
Capitol .xvi.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language I can translate. It appears to be in Catalan, which is a Rom
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a language I can translate. It appears to be in Catalan, which is a Romance language spoken in Catalonia, Spain. If you could provide the translation or context for this sentence, I would be happy to help.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a language I can translate. It appears to be in Catalan, which is a Romance language spoken in Catalonia, Spain. If you could provide the translation or context for this sentence, I would be happy to help.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a language I can translate. It appears to be in Catalan, which is a Romance language spoken in Catalonia, Spain. If you could provide the translation or context for this sentence
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a language I can translate. It appears to be in Catalan, which is a Romance language spoken in Catalonia, Spain. If you could provide the translation or context for this sentence
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	I'm sorry, but the provided text is not in a language I can translate. It appears to be in Catalan, which is a Romance language spoken in Catalonia, Spain. If you could provide the translation or context for this sentence
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then, apply extension, equilibrium, and relaxation of the muscles according to that joint.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the thigh is not caused by strong movements, then extension should be more gentle and lighter, and it will be easier for you to bear.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if there is any cause of operation over the arm, and it happens when you pull out the sticks and that takes a long time to complete the operation, then you should take hammerheads of iron that are placed under the causes that are placed in place, and those that are thin, and not hard on the hands, and be as long as those that are long as the thigh, and from the middle of the hand to the end.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then, cover it over with any cloth according to its length, and place one on the beginning of the thigh of one part and the other part of the other part, and they are inserted into the pus of the foot's bottom.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And if you have the cloths on three parts of the thigh and at the middle, then this restriction of the thigh is not allowed clinically to the right and left side, and it is good for the posture.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	When the long end of the cushion has been administered; and it is placed on the chest to preserve that from movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And above all, make sure you do this in a fracture, and when it is truly necessary.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider the chest in every day and study it thoroughly, and you will guard against apoplexy and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes happen, stop what you are doing and attend to this as soon as possible that it may be cured.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Not all ankle fractures occur; fewer foot bone fractures occur, and toes fractures rarely occur, and only occur due to trauma in the months of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the feet bones are fractured and those bones are sometimes elevated over them between them, you must place the patient's foot on the ground prepared as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And a similar pause the foot on that which is raised from those bones, and similarly heat those bones, and press them, and pull them back in when they turn in the sockets.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And a similar plaster and bandage, and pause here the belly of the foot on a small table with two pieces of plastic.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And similarly stretch that to the foot, push that with drapes and other causes of which you have indicated.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when those three days or four have passed, you will loosen the ligament, and then you will find the bones engaged, or they are dislocated, and the operation on them will be successful with screws.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if they are dislocated, you will restore them, and pull them back in as I have told you to do in the restoration of those that you have mentioned.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And a similar restoration of the dislocated bone is made along the length of the bone, and a small piece is placed under it; and then the foot is placed on this table that I have recommended to you, and you stretch that to the ligament.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	When a joint is compressed by two or three or more bones, you should place your hand over each point of compression and wrap it with a cloth, then pull the table up to the base of the foot and hold it steady over one of the corners of the table for the abdomen of the foot to ensure good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is convenient for you to not overlook that you do not consider all causes which have been said to you in other fractures of the accidents that have been told to you; and pause here with all accidents that come to you.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the humerus of the arm, the femur bone of the thigh, and the knee of the leg.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the humerus of the arm is compressed, you make that cut in that direction, and then lean it towards the end of the two, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And if the midwife does not cut the shoulder, and makes it as the shoulder should be; and if the thigh is broken, then raise the two sides of the little one a little by little, until all of this is outside, and return the humerus to its place as it should be and the shoulder returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on the back of the patient, and when you want to urinate, make the path easy and easy, and reduce and return that second pillow to the first one that was placed at the beginning, and return the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And fast for seven days or until you are recovered, then you will be restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take once a day a piece of linen and press over the abdomen of the patient a canula of wax; and enter the whole vesicle into the cavity of the patient, and sprinkle it through the canula as much as possible while the vesicle is inflated due to the cavity, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then cover it with feces and stay for several days after that have been recommended, until you are cured.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the teeth of the penis or vagina are broken, administer in the restoration and injection of water that has been recommended in the bone of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And water that is not hidden in these proximal fractures and that does not come out much, mainly to the one who studies and uses this free word; then that fracture means to you in the largest possible ways in restoration and stricture of the penis, and therefore understand.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the woman's hair is caught in something, take a knife from anywhere, and put the hair in that; and place a cloth over it within the drapery envelope, and keep it covered for three days or until the swelling subsides, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix. is not a complete sentence and does not provide
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are broken.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one who sustains a fracture, and especially if the bones are large, such as the thigh or shin bone, or seem to be, that you should apply the reduction as quickly as possible, according to the conditions of flebotomy at your disposal or as witnesses testify.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the fracture is open, you should know that you must apply the reduction to the part of the bone that you have powdered on the side opposite to the one that is broken, if there is no other cause for your delay.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong it if you do not have a relapse.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If you happen to have an abscess, then you should restore the restoration of the affected area within nine days, once the abscess has healed, and do not approach it again for three days after that, as you will be performing other unfortunate accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is protruding over the discovery of the wound, then cover that and reduce it to the extent possible and as quickly as possible with your own hands.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not prepared and the force of the wound is on your shoulders, then reduce that to the extent possible with your own hands; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven inches or eight, and its width is according to the quantity of plague; and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to grasp those three or four according to the quantity you indicate in the cure throughout the species of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it is good, and there should be little grease for you that is not bent in the compression over that at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	When it comes to sharp extremity, which is located at the end of the limbs; and when the doctor's hand is large and enters the parts inside.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the form of him.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because when the extremity of him is lowered, it comes up high on the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And he presses it in a way that returns the bone, and it is held fast by some equilibrium.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And he tries to hold the extremities of the fracture together, and if the end of him is cut subtly, and does not pull on the stitch for good exception, you should know that you have inserted the end of that bone inside where the instrument has power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bones of all that have been recommended, insert them inside where they should be, or use one of those bars in any way possible.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	When you observe that the bone is rough and some of its edges are cut off, it is called a fracture.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced and the pain in the thigh becomes very intense, you know that the bone does not return to its natural position; then do as you can to relieve the thigh.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed your restoration and applied the ointment to the bone, immerse your hand in a black stinking ointment, and do not pause on the plague or any other cause that may be present, so that no further damage or decay occurs.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And after the hour of the midnight complement of the bone restoration, and discovering the plague that has been scratched by sharp tools and used according to the amount of the plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And keep you all caution that you do not strain the plague at the fracture, for if many watches are made on the thighs, and there is damage or corrosion or sudden death, it will be sinful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the second strain is more rigid, it is softer and different from the strains of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the plague is large or bad, and you fear that those accidents which have happened will recur, and cause pain in that place, then do not cover over those astels, but rather make them more firm by putting draps of hard cloth over them, and strengthen them with those am.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the plague has already begun to manifest itself, that is, if there is inflammation in the area where you previously placed the cloth, and you need to maintain pressure, then place another cloth over the same area and administer medicine, as we usually do for plagues, such as tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It seems that you suggest that you should slide the limb and consider the plague in every day and evening when it is well-established and closed, and make sure that this member is prepared in such a way that the dressing runs from the part to the areas further away with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If in the plague there are several days, and it is not yet consolidated or has not abscised from the inflamed area, then you should know that here are signs of small wounds that you should be concerned about the plague coming.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those signs there are those that remain attached and extracted, those that of them are not separated and put the member and cause pain, then it is possible for you to insert the second one after the first one.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you encounter the plague or cholera, it is a sign of another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then cover that part with a piece of cloth that suits the part of the body that needs treatment in the case mentioned in the preceding chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And if you cover that part with what I have said and present your case: when it grows larger, lean over the member as if it were the thigh and the helper, and seem like those of the large members, and do not presume to attract or extract from it, nor does death occur due to that for about 20 or 30 days; and you cure the plague if you see it, and if not, then.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of nodification that occurs in the healing of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Nodification occurs in this cure in the healing of any fracture, and mainly that is seen in the joints, and it is pressed by the swelling; and very much you forbid the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	When considering if the node is recent and administered in the medications that have antiseptic effects on the skin, eyes, mouth, anus, and genitals, and also on the limbs; it is necessary to take some or all of those, and apply them to the nodes with the antiseptic solution or albumen of blood, or saliva, and then place those over the node in a bandage, and secure them with good tension.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And the extension that does not close it in days; and if it does not close it, then repeat it another time, until it becomes firm on that layer of plum descentment, four plums having property of remaurant totally as much as is inflamed in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the node has already been converted into stone and is tightening, and causing great pain, and you cut it open through the part of the pus that is most separated, and insert the superfluous and eminent parts, or remove that which has been resected within which it is tightened; and cure it within which it is healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	I apologize, but I am unable to translate the provided text as it
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When repairing a fracture, if it is restored and approximately follows the natural position of the bone, it is considered a successful repair.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is repaired, if it is restored and approximately follows the natural position of the bone, there are several possible causes: one is the lack of proper liquification of the joint or ligament, not following the correct course; or due to excessive stricture of the ligaments within which nutrients cannot reach the member; or due to excessive embrocation; or due to movement that does not occur at the right time; or due to insufficient sinus in the thigh and debaque in the ligament.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cauterization is given to open the thigh and make the member stretch within which the sinus is multiplied, and administered with a bandage, and enter gaug and leticia over it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place a bandage over the member, so that the bandage attracts the correct nutrient to it, or continues embrocation of the wet substance, within which nutrients are allowed to flow and return to their natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	This line seems to be discussing the treatment of bones that have been restored and are now prohibited from being operated on due to certain reasons. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation. Here's a literal translation:
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When one has restored the member to health, according to the surgery for its tortuosity and eminence at the third and fourth phalanges, and it is in that form of the member, but the member is not prohibited from the natural operation of the wound, it does not mean that you receive the word of that which existed in that member is of a new trinity.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Many have already done folk remedies and restorations, and this operation is often criticized with great fear by the hand of the one who makes it, which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and noderation are recent, it is said that they are infiltrated with water in the one who has them, as if they were fuels of altitude and roughness, like mellilot and similar to those; and it should be made with an emplastre of mollification, as the best dyallquilon can be made; or that it is a preference for the rasping of altea and it is contuced with gray of gualina or am oli of cirami, and it is applied to that; or that they are prefers of fat grasses and they are twisted with the fems of colom, and they are similar to those of the medicines that are named for the consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	When some women are dissolved due to frequent rubbing of the skin that is dry and wet, and the member is moved in all directions at any time.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the curvature of the bone is already bent and becomes more and more so, and it is necessary to go to the doctor for this, you will find that the pus is located in the lower part of the cavity and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and it is cut off that which is superfluous from the bones that are being cut with sharp instruments, and there is an easy maintenance in that area of concern and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written
De sermo en dislocacio.	in Latin, and it seems to be discussing the subject of dislocation or misplacement.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	A dislocation is a sudden displacement of one of the joints of the limb, which prevents movement and causes the figure of the member to be distorted, leading to great pain and injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When you encounter an dislocation, you should pierce as much as possible to reduce it, and do not delay in doing so, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so, do not think that it is not enough or tight in the moment of reduction, for many muscles are affected and it causes spasms and painful contractions.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	If something happens, you should cover that you sit with the patient's groin, and place your hand over where the reduction is made; and the member should be held firmly by the tail and the tailor, and the reduction should be made easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with care of that which causes the memorandum to come to their place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the capital of dislocation according to what precedes fracture; from the side of the head, push inside to the side where it is located.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol xxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the mandible from the side.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When the jaw bones are displaced and do not return to their place; and the displacement of the teeth is caused by one of two hands: either they are loose in their sockets for a short time, and then become soft; or they are completely displaced and locked, entering that it is soft at the joint between the cheek and the corner of the mouth, which cannot hold the tooth or close the mouth, and the tongue of the patient is enveloped in the throat.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the displacement of the tooth is slight, it usually returns to its place for no apparent reason.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the displacement of the tooth is complete and locked, it is necessary to administer a reduction of the jaw, and it should not be delayed for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And is that the minister holds the cheek of the mouth, and inserts the doctor's hand between the teeth, either in the part where the jaw bone is displaced, or in both hands if it is displaced in two parts, and the others say that they are deformed for those who engage; and commands the mouth to close its jaws and release them from any part; and the doctor grips the jaw and releases the jaw when it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, and especially if the jaws are dislocated, you should administer an opiate injection of water and oil, and then enter that it is a slight reduction of the jaws and not a long-term reduction of the jaws, as they have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and the mouth is closed and not relaxed, you should rest on those powdered drugs of mercury, and it will be a little help in making the wounds less painful; and then it will be easier to dress them.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And if the man lies on his side, and his head is placed between two earpieces, so that it does not touch the part of the head that is to the right or left; and you do not force any cause; if the bed has been fastened with a leonine fetter, then when the pains are aggravated and the jaws are dislocated, you should know that it is time to call for help.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if it is administered with ease, and you do not work on the edge of the mouth, but rather on the nutrition and bodily fluids, then when the jaw is dislocated and healed, you should know that it is time to call for help.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not converted into their proper places, then you should make continuous movements of the eyes, which cause fevers and frequent sweating, and the belly of the patient becomes full, and the belly often vomiting pure choler.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know that it is lost; and eyesight moves towards that which has happened in that one day.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder is not dislocated from the lats by its continuous movement in the belly; and some are dislocated to the wrong place, and that is declared by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of the same is that the patient lies on his side and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And make sure to cover the place with your hand with strong pressure, so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place your hand over that plaster and powder and tighten that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	When the end of that which is being cut is continued to the edge, it should not be dislocated on any day; you should cover it and reduce and enwrap as has been said and as you appear to need.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand over that plaster, powder, and exfoliation, and command the thigh to adhere to the crest and to be peeled from there as it becomes healthy.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And when this cure is reduced, the end of the muscle is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the displacement of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the thigh to the end of the thigh.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the muscle itself, and this is done through force; and it is not dislocated in the rear by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And the muscle is most dislocated and deformed in the parts beyond the thigh, and most in those where the bones are few, and less in those where there are many; and it is most difficult to set in those where there are many bones.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	If many people suffer from impact or bruising, and the muscle of the patient is affected by cauterization, and it is because of this that it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	I advise you to enter immediately if you are overwhelmed by the patient's care, and you will process in the cure of the patient.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It is known that the dislocation of the patient occurs when you leave the parts behind, so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the other muscles; and you touch between those differences in manifestation; and you touch at the top of the concave muscle and the cap of the muscle, and at the ankle it cannot reduce the force to the inner side of the knee, nor can it be held for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you need the pain or suspension, and you touch with your hand to feel the manifestation, and do not hesitate.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is made with a slight reduction when it is fresh and the ankle is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of the patient is that the master lifts the force of the patient to the parts; and he places the hand on the top of the dislocated muscle, and raises the joint with strength in its own place, and the master lifts the force of the patient, and extends it there; and he places it afterward when it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If the pain does not return after a few days, and the dislocation began to occur, then it is possible that the thigh is swollen with water and needs to be treated with a poultice of linseed, millet, and honey, mixed with water, and applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the thigh should be placed on the patient's back and held in place with the doctor's hand, lifting the head of the muscle, and pulling the thigh towards the joints to prevent further damage, and another servant holds the thigh in place, so that it does not cause further damage. When this is done, the thigh should return to its original position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want to reduce the second one: and it is that you present a man who has a long thigh, and is from the side of that bone, and enters the muscle of the thigh with the titillate of the thigh and raises the titillate of the thigh to the parts where it will be suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the thigh away from the belly of the patient.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	When the thigh is injured, it is necessary to cover that which is hung, because that other cause is suspended, so that the dislocation returns as much as possible.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	When the swelling is reduced by another hand: and it remains on the ground a long bone of its head, like a piece of mortar, which is neither thick nor fine, and is placed at the end of the thigh; then place your hand on the top of the bone of the leg, and the thigh is placed secondary to the length of the bone, and extend the arm of you over the parts of the other part; and extend the arm of the other part for strength, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it is difficult to reduce the joint by all causes that have been said, then use this treatment: and if you take a bone of the quantity that is in the long of two brasses, and the length of which is four fingers, and the largest part of it is located at the top of the tittilic according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then place your hand on the reduced part with claws as if the bone does not affect the thigh.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place your hand at the end of the thigh, and extend the arm or the other arm over the bone that enters into the parts behind, and see the bone on the assistant and the arm and the end of the arm.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place the arm over a scale according to latitude, and let it be extended to the parts beyond that, and the other part be suspended from the other side, so that the joint does not come out of its place.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the joint of the patient is completed according to any method that you can possibly do, and you cover that you pause from me after the tightening of the titillating part of the lana de engual with enough quantity; and you pause applying a plaster prepared with powder of mollusk shells and albumen of hooves over all the muscle, so that it revolves as before, and you strengthen it furthermore the titillating part with stricture decent; and the liament is revolve over the plaster, and the member of the patient is annexed to the col of the patient, and it is lessened, and not harmed the member of the patient for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And cover that the food of the patient is little, and when this member is comfortable, then what is pushed to the sanacion of the patient.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if the food is given more in seven or eight days or exercises a movement; and then if it stops and does not soften, you have already been healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated by movements seen due to humidity that happens to it or by another cause, you cover that in that case, three points are administered cauterization, according to what is said in the capital of cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If everything is done correctly and it takes about three days for the joint to heal and the joint does not remain closed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over some wounds, and do not remain closed and cannot raise that arm to the parts desired, you know that those nerves of yours, which are at the top of the muscle, have already been inscribed or extended or made smooth, and you know that the joint will not remain closed in its place for long.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is made you need the chest and the nipples or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension to the maximum, but when it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if another stricture is administered there, and cures that which is healed within.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If the cure is delayed too much in the member and the movement of it, you use the thigh or the knee over that when that gravity is removed and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the thigh.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the knee joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and particularly in the part adjacent to the part behind, and the dislocation of the knee does not depend on your effort to stretch or stretch the other leg, and when you adjust the dislocated knee, it is clearly declared to you that the knee joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch that the other muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover the joints, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible that it comes to the gout cautery, where if you see the gout cautery, difficult is the reduction of it, and more easily when it is in the rear parts, and most of all when it is in the other species of dislocation, and more pain, and unseen motions of that knee.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the leg of it is extended as much as possible, and the arm of it is expanded, and the most of the doctor's fingers are over the knee and below it, and he presses the joint with his fingers on the bones of its knees or on the palm of his hand entering therein as it turns in its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the displacement is in the parts that are doubled, then return to your hand what doubling it was for your hand, entering where it pierces the palm of your hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the displacement does not comply with the reduction, then administer vehement extension and firm movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that extension with those two ministers so that the extension is not harmed by the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And if it is necessary to rotate the arm, you must turn the entire part, because it will be wrapped around the doubled long over the hand of the patient, or limb.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply that oil to that part so that it is those causes that help in lubrication of the joint and facilitate; and press the joint with a firm push within which returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the reduction of that cover that is placed over that ointment which is sterilized and exfoliated in the album of the wound, and is extended over the stricture descent, and the arm is hung from the collar, and is laid for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	When the joint is formed in the desired location, then you should cut the tendon of the patient and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see that the joint is not tightening, then you should apply plaster to the tendon and leave it there for several days until it becomes tightened; and then cut it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you see that the joint is not reducing in size, and the disposition of the patient is moving, then you should apply moisture to the skin and gentle pressure, and compression, within which the patient is released; or place a cushion on the reduced joint, it is a fatty joint; and then cut the tendon, and leave it there over the bone and the nail.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then put on a bandage; and when you dry it, then you should gently rub the joint with the reduced tendon, and then go over that reduced joint, which is moving slowly, one way and the other, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	I am in bandages, when it is limited.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place a bandage over that wet and sanded cow's horn, and apply pressure on that; and make some turns, four of them, around that, and reduce it to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text "Capitol .xxv
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When a joint is dislocated in some part of the body and the reduction of the dislocation is difficult, and it is not due to other dislocations, but rather because of the speed at which the reduction can be made in that particular joint at the time of the displacement, it is likely that the location is edematous or that there is an issue with the edema of that specific joint.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation is achieved by placing the joint of the patient's thigh over a table and extending the hand of that leg, and then pressing on the elbow or palm of the other arm against the prominence of the joint, and pushing it back to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is likely that this should be considered if the palm is already on the abdomen of the thigh, then the patient's hand should press the two hands of their own thigh on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation precedes the two hands of the thigh, then the position of the thigh of the metge should be placed over the immediacy of the joint on the table, so that the palm of the patient can press on the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	If the swelling returns as soon as it leaves, that is good; but if not, tighten that which you have separated from the scar and lay it aside; and do not wait any longer, for if you do not help or cannot in the reduction of the pus that passes through the days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint pain follows its own course; and I do not notice any cause in the thigh, except that it is softened and cannot be strengthened by any cause; you should know that the nerves are divided or compressed, and you are not engaged in it unless it is tightened with a cautery at the base of the toe and fort with enough force to confirm some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	If the swelling returns as soon as it leaves, you should stop on the empastre that has been recommended, and let it be laid aside and tightened for several days; and then it should be deslided and laid aside and the pain of the patient should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of the patient is not stopped and happens to be severe, you should relax that which has been tightened and let it be soaked in water with some vinegar and let it dry before being removed.
Capitol .xxix.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided does not seem to
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of dislocations of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	When some joints are dislocated in the entire limb.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when some fingers are dislocated at the back of the hand or in the abdomen of the patient, then push the finger and return it to its place, if possible.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And hold the finger tightly, suspend the finger above the part where it is dislocated, and leave it there for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And suspend the finger and extend it when it is dry in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it rains, read that second part of the story and do not continue to slide it in the day and exercise it with movement, and read that again; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it appear as if this is the case, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient, and hold it there and perform the first operation again when it is cured.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And in the same way make it appear as if this is the case when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the treatment of spinal dislocation.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an injury occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and there are many more vertebrae in other parts of the body, they do not receive treatment, and death comes to the buttocks.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	When it comes to the matter of the patient's menstruation, it is not within their will to hold back; and if they are seen, it is softened by the members of the body or the changes in the body or the breasts, or one of those; or a spinal column is made at that location, where four parts are made and four parts are removed.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And that has already been divided into the back parts and is not narrowed.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment of the patient is that if the narrowing occurs due to puberty, then that is not treated or cured in that part or in that part alone.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that which is felt or percussed or seems to be in those parts, the ancients had many ways of treating, of which the least profitable was returned to the most profitable; and you have already been opened for that which has caused too much pain in the patient, due to the proximity of the exposed part, of which I have explained and made instruments of different types for that which is shown and expanded there.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in yellowish discharge that occurs from the part where it enters into the chest, there is no treatment or cure for that; and apparently in that which is made at two lancets.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, it is not cured except for the one that occurs in the two parts mentioned by me, as I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And if the patient's thigh is extended over his face as far as possible, and it is extended further down the stomach to prevent the chest from being compressed, the chest will not be hurt.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place another cushion at the end of the thigh around the head of the patient, and another cushion on the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the midwife holds the cushion, and does not stop in the socket; and another midwife holds the other side in that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And cover the head of the patient and pull the string tight; and extend the end of the string to the cushion that you need for the head of the patient, and tie it there; and stretch the other string over the ankles of the patient's legs, and adjust all the strings and tie them on the other cushion that you need for the feet of the patient.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the physician extends the limb to the point of the knee, and does not cause any pain to the two knees and the limbs in which they are inserted, but rather does not stop until it is done as they have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the physician places his hands over the spine for strength until it returns, or places them on that one table, and adjusts the weight of the feet as it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If it does not return in this way, then you take a table of which the latitude or longitude is three degrees, and dig into the side of the table where they have said that one end of the maze is located in the extreme part of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And the physician stops the track of the table over the spine, and the physician places his feet on the other end, and then enters as soon as the spine is straight and returns to the original location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the door that turns the maze. And it is necessary for you to stand on the ground, as the cap of the maze is at the end of the two knees, the longitude of which is a hand's breadth, and the cap must be at the end of the two knees, and each hand must turn one revolution, and each must not remain on the ground for so long that it causes pain.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When a stone is lodged in the urinary passage, and it does not pass, it is necessary to make an incision in the abdomen and draw out the stone with forceps. The incision should be made on the side where the stone is located, and the forceps should be inserted through the urethra.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	At the end of the stone, there is a narrow passage formed by the urethra, the length of which is similar to that of a cock's comb; in the other two urethras, it resembles this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tightly tie the strings that you have tied in the abdomen at the top of the stone, and the strings that you have tied in the thighs at the bottom of the stone.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Then each point must have a minister who tightens the point with his hand and makes the spine bend according to what has been said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the point:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then the spine is returned to its original position and the area is relaxed, as if you were pressing an excised piece of flesh against the album of the thigh, and then stop; and place your hand over the excised piece of flesh that is three inches wide or more, and the length of the spine is the amount you took from the area of the whiteness, and over the end of the spine it is.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	When you have found the part that was mentioned, and use the medicinal food subtle within which it is healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If you find any signs of inflammation in the end of the cure, know that certain medicines have been administered that moisten and dilute the administration table for a long time, which have been recommended; and already, in that place, the liniment has been applied.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	If some signs of inflammation appear in the back of the spines of the two, and it is due to that dislocation; and that part of the one who has already had it, so that it does not cover that it is a proper cure for this medicine, as much as you can add to your death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not always mean dislocation, but only in such cases, and does not happen to those that happen to the other small removals and hollowings.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And when the joint of the ankle is dislocated, it is done in four ways, that is, by the parts of the fingers, or by the parts of the forehead, or by the parts of the chin, or by the parts behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	When the joints are dislocated, it is mainly in the fingers and less so in the knuckles or back of the hand.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And when the dislocation of the joint is seen, it is clear that the hand is too long and the thumb is too prominent, and the hand cannot be bent without causing pain, and this is the place where you must apply the cautery for cautery apoplexy, since the end of the thigh has already arrived here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And that is the reason for the injury seen in that place, because the accidents of the hand are opposite to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And when the dislocation of the joint is seen in the knuckles, it is clear that the hand is too tight and does not cause pain in the thumb, and if it is pierced through the anus, it cannot be over there; and the urine of the patient is retained and the penis is cautery apoplexy, and you must place the ambulance on the sole.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And when the dislocation of the joint is seen in the back of the hand, it is clear that the thumb does not expand and cannot be bent by bending the knuckles, and the hand is shorter than the other, and the penis is softened, and the end of the thigh is at that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The first source sentence to translate is: "Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	When the dislocation is recent in that particular part, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you must pull towards where the joint is stuck and extend it to the parts of the fingers and the parts of the thumb, and also to the right and left, as much as it can return without requiring another treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If the dislocation does not return in this manner, then you must prepare to stretch the bone of that part further forward, or as much as it can, or as much as possible; and another person stretches the end of that bone as far as it can reach the fingertips; and hold down the tendon on the top of the thigh, and hold another person at the end of the tendon.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is extension of the bone or of the finger to the angle of the elbow to the angle of the shoulder, or to the angle behind the thumb.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it is the extension of all those to a single direction within which the thigh is raised and the leg hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is specific to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	When the dislocation returns, as they say, then do nothing; but if it does not return, then you must use everything possible to speak about your own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the parts of the finger, know that the thigh should be pressed against the side as if it were hanging on the end of the thumb in that place where the head of the thigh meets the point where the elbow is; and extend the limb from the part of the shoulder to the other part of the wrist.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And if another stronger minister takes the braces of the thigh and pulls out the large end of the thigh, and extends the parts of the thigh apart for extension, so that it returns to its original position.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This method is used to perform this curative procedure in which this member is reduced that the other methods do not.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you do not obey the instructions of this method of curing and do not follow the rules, then know that the two ends of the thigh are attached to the strong, firm limb, and the toes and heels are tightened.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	When measuring the length of a part of the body according to the quantity of four digits, and the malady's extent is greater than the other by two digits, it is considered severe.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And if the malady is suspended over the head of the foot, and it is in the sole; and its length on the ground is the quantity of two brasses.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a young man to cut off the cap of the thigh, and suspend it at the malady with another young man, and the other young man will cut off the thigh with the strength that empowers it, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when there is a dislocation at the end of the part, it is necessary that the malady be placed over the knee according to what has been recommended in the hollow; and hold the limb tightly on the malady properly and on the chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And if two thighs are placed, one on the foot and the other on the knee; and their extremities are adjusted to the peg that fits over the leg according to which parts are humid, so that the malady is not damaged because the thigh is between the thighs of the patient, so that you do not have to extend the parts beyond the limits.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	When each minister extends his hand to his part, he should place the cautery on his mouth and reduce it according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If you are obese, then do so greatly; and if not, then stop doing it very diligently and listen to what they say in the medical literature for that engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Many cover that this foot is under the thighs naturally.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the parts below, it is necessary to extend the cambua slightly, and follow this narrative on the leg; and the surgeon places the palm of his hand on the outer side of the foot, and presses that with the other hand, and that extension stops at the part where the other foot begins.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the parts behind, it is not necessary to extend the foot to the parts in front, and it should be elevated on the ground; since there is a cause that it is placed over two ankles, and the limbs are extended, according to what has been said, there has not caused any harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When the joint is to be treated with pressure, place the table over the location where the joint pain is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then when the reduction is completed — and the sign of reduction is not seen by you, and it is that you extend from the thigh to the knees, and when you see those joints and the thigh extends beyond the knee and expands its covering, then you know that the member that was previously reduced is returned — and you adjust the thighs and place a cushion and extend the bandage so that the leg is not too tight in any part; and hold the reduction with gauze for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And remove the bandage and the cushion, and compare one change to another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those joints in their place, then you know that the dislocation is closed, and then let the member go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply that, and extend it next to your first stretch, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	When you remove that, and make it wait in bed for a few days, if it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capital, twenty-second.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the elbow.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The elbow is dislocated in three ways: first, by the parts in front, second, by the parts on the side, and third, by the parts behind; and the parts that are not dislocated are not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of elbow dislocation is that you command the thigh to apply its cushion to the buttock; you know that the elbow is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the limbs of the elbow is that you stretch the thigh straight, if it can be extended over that; hold the two hands to the face of the elbow, and place the elbow between the two fingers; and make the elbow stick to your palms, and hold them together between the fingers on the elbow of the patient with strength, and another minister extends the leg until the elbow returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When it comes to the relief of the patient's pain, it is said that their leg is held down by the thigh due to non-laborious work.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And apply that and let it adhere to the thigh and attach the bandage to the thigh, and apply those empyems with a needle for three days or four, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the bandage of ambulacio for more than three days, until it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the anus is successful, apply firmly with the finger the lips of those that were in the previous operation of the anus.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol. This is likely a section or chapter heading.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle has some bruises that are improved by gentle removal, and some have dislocated secondarily, and the dislocation of the ankle is made or at the joints or at the joints of the fingers.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that sometimes the ankle swells due to the joint from which it was dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment of the removal of the ankle is usually red and is that it is extended as much as possible to the most and is uncomfortable until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When in the treatment of the patient when one leg is dislocated, cover that you make cease to the thigh, and hold it by a strong and skilled minister from the side of the two of those in the lower part of the body.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if you have the second leg dislocated, take hold of the ankle of the raised foot, and take your left hand from the ankle behind the foot in the cavity of the cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And if you pull the foot to your left hand, and take your right hand twice by the foot, and extend your right hand; and press the chest of the foot with the right hand, the thighs will follow its movements.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make these cuts according to what has been counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And press the chest of the foot with the second cut, and you are in the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If you return in one cut or two according to this manner, and if you see the foot is not engulfed, it is good; and otherwise, you must continue the operation, until that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are prohibited from reducing the leg as recommended, make a jam over the patient's thigh on the ground, and create a flat mattress on the ground, and place it between the patient's legs, and you have already covered the patient with a cloth that does not expose the leg.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	When the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot over the patient's knees or the calf that lies on the back of the foot; and extends that same minister against the extension of the thigh, and the hand is present between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that this part of the leg does not become inflamed beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And if the mason fixes the dislocation in the thighs, and another minister holds the thigh firmly to the parts outside, so that the dislocation returns to ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and is declared to you as the health of the reduction, stop plastering and extending it greatly, and tie the foot to the thigh firmly.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to harm the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the calf over it does not become very vehement and leads to its injury.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And keep it for two or three days, or three; and if the calf becomes soft, extend it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	When it is about to rain on that day or in the fourth day, and forbids the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is about to rain on that day or in the fourth day, and forbids the patient from moving for forty days, then it is not safe to move if the dislocation is not over the dissolved and corrupted part, and accordingly, no cure will be received.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you encounter the cautery wound, know that you must administer in the diarrhea of the water in which we have described our narrative, in another place of cure and embrocation, until it is improved.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 324.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Know that if that which is dislocated is small in extent of his work; and therefore, it is not difficult, but rather easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the nails of both feet, know that you must cover the patient with a blanket or table, and be as if he were standing.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	When you have the patient's foot, and pause it on that which seems to be of the joints, and then apply that to the foot with care, so that it returns to its original position, and you see that it has returned and is not visible in the prominent part.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then pause the abdomen of the patient's foot on a table that holds the entire foot, with two caps, and apply pressure evenly and firmly for three days; and then remove it and make it return to its place through massage every day, until it is stretched out and secured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitulum XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that are caused by plague or fracture or in any other way.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When an accident occurs of that kind, and you are in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, you may see that success follows.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore it is not to be presumed that in the cure of the patient one knows what is best, but rather what is in the art, after long experience, mercy, and compassion, gradually, not hastily nor presumptuously; and that one should use the beginnings of medicines that are given aspostemas only, and leave the thigh to divine judgment, not to that which one hopes for salvation from perdition, but to that which brings relief from malady, and in which there is some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	When you finally begin to work on the patient's reduction at the beginning of the cause, it will lead to an incision with a cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	If the member returns as you want, apply the necessary medication that contains cautery and cures the wound as desired for the drying of the engorged areas.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If dislocation is considered a fracture and occurs in the separated bones, you should perforate the stem of these, and do as has been said in the simple diseases of this, that it is preceded in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And keep and avoid according to your virtue that intrusion in the ways of fear following what precedes my preaching; for thus it is better for you to serve the true Creator, and less permanent for your glory, and less salutations to you as you see those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	This is the end of the paragraphs of Albucasim perfectly made from which God will not be benefited.
Amen.	Amen.
