Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The first source sentence translates to:
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	The first source sentence translates to: "I see that you are alive in this order of this treatise on the second way of exposure and declaration, and for the reason that you come in the forms of the tools of cauterization and of other instruments of the work as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of the same, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause for which the craftsman is not able to create the artifex in the pelvis, but in our time, it is because the art of medicine is long and that covers the actor as being exercised in the science of anatomy which Guillaume entered when he knew the advantages of the limbs and their shapes, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the number of them, and their kind; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the loci of the inflammation of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	To which I reply that this is the name of a man, not a word, and mainly in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already said of this in the introduction of this book; however, not everyone understands what we have said about anatomy, so it does not fall into error for those who die due to this science, as you have seen many of them, who are formed in this science and get from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	You saw a physician who had incurred an abscess in the neck of a woman, and incurred some arteries of the neck that flowed greatly into which the woman died between the shoulders of him.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another physician who thought that the throat of a man was blocked by a stone, which had been processed in his state, and the stone was large, and came to him and was cleaned with water from the vesica, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you had already called for help to remove that, and I saw that for the large size of the stone and the disposition of the thigh under it that the man would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	When you see another doctor who received payment from a lord of our land for surgery, and went to a blacksmith's shop that was known for fractures in the thigh; and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, dried the fracture, over the plague, with pulleys and hinges, and did not let the plague air out.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And the dissection is made according to the will of the patient, and the relief, and the tightening for some days and orders that we untie the ligament; and it is clear that the thigh and foot were apart, and then came to loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you called for him, and appeared at the dissection, and managed to achieve peace and ease from those pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so it could not be stopped, and it did not cease to walk around the corruption in the thigh after the operation.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	You see another doctor who performed an amputation for cancer, and it ulcerated at the same time, within which the cunning of the lord of the land was revealed.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the curve of the bone is due to melancholic humor, and it does not cover that pervades the whole, but rather that it is a member that has suffered from all that has been hosted.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	For this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be performed in two parts: one part is for health and the other for the more important possessions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And now you have existed here in this free place where the operation was performed in which there were errors and fears; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard this and settle that, so that the children do not fall into speaking and disobeying you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, put your weapons in the hands of your anxiety and protection from God, and your hips in difficulty and closure.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God to be healthy and praised succession, and settle the terrible wounds of difficult healing, and keep your weapons in that which makes you fearful, so that you may be judged in your faith and in your name you will not escape: four more remain in your glory, and put on earth and in others your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Glory has already been given in some of my enemies.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	When you do not treat a miscarriage properly, it is because the bad humors do not leave their place.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already covered this section in three parts.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered from the head to the foot, in the forms of the instruments and the burnings of the cautery, and for that reason necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of drying and perforation, and of ventilation, and of plagues, and of extraction of sages and of similitudes to those, the entire chapter ordered in the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and displacement, and of cure of twist and similitudes to those; the chapter ordered from the head to the foot, and in the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery by fire and by acute medicine, and reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	When that person begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I ask if you question the quality of the cauterizing instruments and the dressings for that part, and in what collection it is prohibited to cauterize.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the speech on the quality of cauterizing and the dressing is long and prolix, subtle by knowledge, secretly agitated; and many wise people have already spoken on it, and they are in disagreement, and for me a little of their words is enough to fear delay.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization comforts the entire collection universally, whether it is material or its material, except for two collections, which are collections of its material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and decayed collection, the material deteriorates; four others thought that cauterization was beneficial for that, and others thought the opposite of that, that cauterization is not convenient in badness, which is due to quality and dryness, and nature of the fire is quality and dryness, and it is unsuitable that bad decayed and dry material be cauterized and dried so that it can be cured.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	When you ask if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, it is customarily called gout by doctors. For those who argue otherwise, it is said that through cauterization, it is beneficial in the entire tail of the tail and dry that appears in the chests of men, when you compare the chest of a man with his humidity to the collection of fire, it hurts the chest of a man.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And you say for the speech of that, I have already experimented with it in my own practice.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not think that this is the only one who has already experimented with it, having been expropriated and exercised in the capital of cauterization for exercise, and having known the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of diseases in their members, and the causes of those, the accidents of those, and the passage of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other complexes, it is not about your fear, and especially in wet and sick complexes, where all doctors have agreed on this, and are not disagreed about the benefit of cauterization in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Indeed, sons, that the secret of healing by cauterization at the fire and its goodness, is only in cauterization, which is the focus, the heat of which does not reach any other member than the one that is cauterized and not noticeable in the other members except in a small amount.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	When the pain in the body spreads to certain parts of the body, and it is very difficult to treat, then it is said that it is a case of gout.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	However, fire, due to its sublimity and good nature, does not help in treating gout unless it is excessive. And we know this by experience and the long period of studying the art of truth; and therefore I am excused from the length of this sermon and if it were not for the free will in this moment to my fire, and the quality of the operation of the heart and the expulsion of the waste through which you expel the waste, the philosophical sermon is demonstrated, which is sharp in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And wise sons, know that it is best to do cauterization and rest at the most suitable time.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the suffering from accidental time is submerged in the vigor of the cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary pain, more and faster, those that do not suffer delay due to the fact that it is feared of those that will come maliciously, which is greater than the small suffering that comes from time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. However, if the pain persists or worsens, it may be necessary to seek medical attention from a skilled practitioner. It is important to remember that not all conditions can be cured with cauterization alone, and further treatment may be required.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	If the cause is not known, it is important to seek medical attention as soon as possible. Cauterization alone may not be sufficient to cure the condition, and further treatment may be required. It is also important to note that certain humors can cause pain, and these must be addressed in order to alleviate the symptoms.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, cauterization should not be relied upon as a sole treatment for joint pain. It is important to consider the skill and expertise of the practitioner, as well as the quality of their work and the potential risks involved. In some cases, other treatments may be more appropriate or effective.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the condition may return at some point in the future, depending on the nature of the malady and its location within the body, as well as the skill and expertise of the practitioner. In some cases, cauterization may be an effective treatment for joint pain, but it is important to consider the potential risks and side effects. If the condition is caused by a subtle malady in a small area of the body with few humors and fluids, it is possible that the pain may not return after cauterization. However, it is important to seek medical attention if the pain persists or worsens.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	This is a common speech that refers to cauterization as one of the oldest forms of medical treatment, and it is often spoken in a way that I do not fully understand, but I believe that it is not a form of healing that solely relies on medicine or another cause.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	However, the cause is the opposite of that; and I understand that cauterization is not merely a form of medicine, but rather it is used when some diseases require the administration of medicines, and those medicines do not help, and in the end, cauterization is used to relieve the pain, and to apply the medicine.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And it seems to me that cauterization is one of the oldest forms of medical treatment, but I do not understand what the common people and many doctors mean by this.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients believed that cauterization was better than using iron for this purpose, and they did not know this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	The ancients believed that the location of cauterization does not cause pain, and they did not know this because it is not absolutely true, for you have already done it and you have become addicted to it, and cauterization is better than using iron as they said; but when you do cauterization with gold, it is not declared by you, because it depends on the quantity you want for the hardness of gold, and you prepare the receiver for the gold; and if you adjust over it, the gold will be burned in the fire, and then some layers are added by the craftsman for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	To achieve this, it is necessary to make points with a pointed iron and place them firmly and accurately during the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have ordered this capital in the cauterization after the previous one, and I have ordered those of the foot to be placed inside the feet, so that the patient can ask for this without pain.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Cauterization for head pain due to cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first capital.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization causes humidity and cold to be applied to the accidented part of which you cause damage, causing soda and many rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the hooves and the auricles fluent, and many sleep, and pain in the teeth and gallbladder, and universally in all maladies that appear due to cold, such as paralysis, stroke, and apparent in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows, which first commands the patient to evacuate the head that has been cut off by surgical means, three or four times, according to the virtue of the patient and the age of the patient and his custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And if you want to shave that part of the body, and if you make it pass over a low chair and place your hands on the patient's chest, then...
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And pause the razor of your hand on the skin of the nose between the patient's nostrils.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, as the previously mentioned place has been found, mark that location with a point, and if you do not have a cautery olive, then this is its form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And place that over the marked location, with your hand that descends, which is tightened little by little, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And take your lighter and look at the location, and if you see any part of the head that has been exposed, then as much as the amount of errors, raise your hand, and if not turn your hand on that iron, on another of that, if it is cold, enter that is seen of the head that I have told you to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a small piece of salt and dissolve it over the location and stir it with your hand for three minutes.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand over the border of the hole in the wall and put that on the inside where the focus is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to apply the remedy to the affected area, entering it as soon as possible, so that it may heal.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the Roman plague has opened the abdomen, so much milk gets into the breast that it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They said to those who had a cauterized nail inside the bone, and it was held by the cauterization inside until any part of the spinal column was harmed.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And if it is necessary to cut the bone, and to repair it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They said that others should use the cauterization when it comes close to the end, entering where it presses on the bone firmly and deeply, and this is the way to make an alphecati small:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate that those vapors will escape from that place.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the Roman plague is held for a long time and it is cured when it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these special kinds of cauterization in practice, only in the hands of those who fear; and that, my friend, is better for your health when it is, and when the head is divided by a solution of continuity of the tissue as has been testified in other members, and especially when the head of the thigh is free from nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	When using the first method of cauterization, it is safer and more effective to use it; and from that point forward, it is used for its benefits.
Capitol segon.	2. When using the second method of cauterization, it is
Del cauteri del cap.	2. When using the second method of cauterization, it is
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	2. When there is chronic and long-lasting pain in the entire head, and it extends to the lower part of the face, and one uses needles, probes, and purgatives, and bandages, and poultices, and poultices, and plasters, and gauzes, and compresses, and if that cauterization has not been effective and does not profit from that cauterization, then consider if the head of the mouth is of great creation in its nature; and do not cause too much bleeding, and if that cauterization is used on another part of the body, use a smaller one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	2. And if it is necessary to cauterize that over the corner of the upper part of the head, use it after the point has been made.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	2. Cut the coda and expose the bone that contains the amount that has been found, and cauterize that with a cautery in the part of the head that is called the temple, — and that place is where the wind blows.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And then say to her, "Your turn now, and do not discover the bones, for the gout causes much greater pain than all other caustics of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply this cauterization in its place, where it is covered by the one that causes the same effect on the corns of the head and the occipital region as the one that is cauterized in your own location of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	End of chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of non-antique cauterization for emigration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When in the beginning of the head pain is felt, or if there is a sudden pain in the forehead, it should be removed by extracting medicines from the head and administering the other cure, which you have mentioned in the cases of diseases; and this should not be abused, for cauterization in that place can be done in two ways: either with acute medicine burned, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Many cauterizations with acute medicine are done by taking a hot iron and touching the ends of the wounds with the hands, covering them with cloths.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	If you approach the location of the pain to the temple with a lancet, enter where it is located in the foot, entering where it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then strengthen the area with a bandage, and leave it for three hours; and then remove the bandage and treat the plague for two or three days, and then pause over the submerged crotch within the wound that the location caused.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that with enguanted inside it when it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you see, make some medicines that burn as you have written in the book of burning medicines in the aforementioned treatise.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cauterization is iron, according to this method: the form of this is...
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	...called the clavicle, where the head of the foot is attached in the form of a thorn, with a curve, and in the middle part of it there is a small eminence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And pause over the location of the pain, and tie your hand — so that the artery is not hurted by the one you left — and roll the iron little by little at high speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the quantity of blood that is discharged from the specific part of the spine is less than the amount that should be excreted by the body, and you do not expel it with your own hand, then you will not prevent the accumulation of fluid in the veins.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then take a piece of salt and place it on the wound, and keep it there for three days; then replace the salt with fresh gravel, and care for the wound as it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you see, make a point at the end of the umbilical cord according to cauterization, and keep an eye out for an incision in the artery in this truly ancient way.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of ancient umbilical cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the umbilical cord as previously described, and as was said in the divisions of the diseases, and do not profit from the treatment, and sometimes for the disease that does not suffice what was said in the first cauterization in medicine or in the cauterization with fire, you will then see that you cut the umbilical cord at the point where the pain is located, or rather that of the line; and pause your hand for a moment and tense it there while incising the artery and passing it through the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is harmed by chewing, and that the lizard does not become inflamed and the nerves that cause that, and that it does not become dislocated.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the dilated artery, then in the dilated part there is fear, and especially to that which ignorantly does not know what to do and does not study or practice; and leave the operation in that at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will find in memory of the regimen of blood flow in case of an accident to the artery according to the right hand side, in this place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see of this malady that does not support this cautery and see the chest of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the same place as the former incision, and dress the wound after it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, dress the cautery that was said in the capital of stretching of the artery with an arc of cautery, and this cauterization is better and less frequent.
Capitol .v.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in the language
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in the language of the medieval medical treatise you requested. The text "De cauterisacio
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the aurelha (joint) there is pain due to cold humors and it is cured by the causes that I have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not remain, then you should make points with the cauterization iron, and this is the name of the point, which is in this form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When a point is made on the knee, and it is placed along the entire circumference of the thigh as it rotates, or in the circuit of any other part if the pain is in that part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Use the cautery on the knee cap little by little, until the desired location is reached.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery points in the entire thigh, and those that are left, and properly cares for the places entered that are healthy.
Capitol .vi.	Capitulum VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of Cautery on Hair.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Hair that is cured and treated with cauterization is not the same as the species that come through the flesh, according to what has been said in the divisions of the diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that end up due to acidity or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that hair of turtura, use jewels and purgatives and gargles, and do not confirm your cure, then the cauterization of the thigh is three: the first is the knee cap, the second a small point that you should hold for a while, and the third the conjunctiva of the labia.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When the cauterization is paused for the opposite side of the affected part, there is no apparent relief in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is to cauterize the point where the cauterization is made on the side of the extremity of the swollen thumb, and on the other side, the longer one is second in length to the said pous, and then stops the cauterization when it is burned by the amount of the hernia of the specified part of the codena.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of cauterization, and it is specific to the barber, the form of which is laid out on the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is quite subtle that one has few eyes; and certainly, a little of this overabundance of food is enough.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And how to cure the place where it is made that the process is entered when it is healthy.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy occurs and is treated as it has been said and does not confirm your medication and the patient does not have a fever, you should cauterize that part four times: on all the corners of the left cheek; and cauterize and the location of the head, as they have said; and cauterize in the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	When the hand of the cautery is made according to how it is said, it is customarily called a "hand" in English.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	When it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is less painful; and it is customary to say that one should proceed with care.
Capitol .viii.	Capitulum VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	A cauterization for forgetfulness is made by scarring.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover them with large and round pills or tablets made of the patient's own flesh at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then cut off the head of the patient and place it on the chest as described in the book of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place those certain veins on the cushion, as the hand of the cautery is.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Then do as follows according to what I have said before.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if for those who are cured, it is; and otherwise, do three cauterizations on the same side of the head, which are drawn from the raised part of the head towards the lower part of the chin.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cauterization of the largest part of the foot, and carefully apply the cauterization as it is supposed to be done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you add more and the patient can bear it, apply the cauterization in that location; and if you see that there is more addition, apply it on both corners.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Carefully apply the remedy when it is cured; and let the cauterization or olive oil be in second place according to the given form.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of parasites and softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in head softening of the face and as they have said; and cut the head of the patient, and carefully apply the cauterization on the location of the cauterization on the head, and apply it on all the corners of the head, and apply it on the third part of the neck, and apply it on three spines of the collarbone.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the body softening of many parts and the patient's tolerance and the patient is strong, apply the cauterization on that part with four cauterizations on the spines of the back, and then apply it within the codon mot of the patient, and elevate the second arm.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	When treating that part which is to be healed, and this is olive oil cauterization.
Capitol .x.	The text you've provided appears to be written in a medieval
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Latin, which is quite different from modern languages like English, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's the translation of
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No is cauterized the epileptic but that epilepsy is by flea." This sentence seems to be saying that epilepsy is not caused by cauterization, but rather by fleas. However, this interpretation may not be entirely accurate
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore it is necessary to change the brain of the patient at the beginning of the age and at another cure which has been prescribed in the division when the abdomen is large and can tolerate the exception of the medicines." This sentence suggests that it is necessary to modify or change the patient's brain at the start of their life and at a later stage, possibly due to a large abdomen that can tolerate different treatments. However, this interpretation is quite speculative as the language used is quite archaic and the meaning may not be entirely clear without additional context.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the child who does not tolerate the medicines is given nourishment with guards and stimulants, the brain will be changed, and this will have an effect for several days, bringing benefit to the veins." This sentence suggests that giving a child who cannot tolerate medications a diet rich in guards and stimulants can change their brain and bring benefits to their veins over time. However, this interpretation is also quite speculative as the language used is quite archaic and the meaning may not be entirely clear without additional context.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And if you remove the head of the abdomen, and if you cauterize that part with a cauterization tool in the previous location of the head, and another cauterization in the occipital part of the head, and over each corner of the head you can cauterize." This sentence suggests that if the head of the abdomen is removed, it should be cauterized using a cauterization tool in a specific location of the head, and then cauterized again in another location. The use of cauterization in this context is quite unusual and may not have any medical basis.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the patient is very strong and tolerant, you should cauterize those that I have mentioned, which have a paralyzing and softening effect on the chest over the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is olive oil that follows as previously stated.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is young, you should pause cauterization with this delicate hand.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are humid and corrupted and very large in size, you should cauterize those that have been mentioned with the effect of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity that becomes melancholy, and the chest of the patient is humid, you should give him this that whitens the brain of the patient according to what was previously stated in division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And if you reduce the head of the patient, and make a round cut on it, and then place it in that location of the head, you should do so.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The patient's thigh is sixty times larger than its usual size and must be held tightly in place.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is worthy of being bound with ancient woolen threads.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat that over the fire for a moderate period of time, which the sufferer finds comfortable when in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that on the patient's neck, inside the circle of their head, and let it stay there until it is warmed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And apply a poultice to the patient's thigh once a week for a whole week, or until it is healed; or if you prefer, burn small points on the affected areas according to the size of the foot, but make sure you have the proper cauterization instrument: this is a special type of cauterization that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then wrap that around the neck, either on the border or within the gullet.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol, Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of water descending in the hole.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are declared the beginning of water in the hole by the senhals that I have told you in the division, then begin and give to the patient a piece of bread and keep that moist with all the humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	When that joint is bathed in warm water for the first time, it should be done with great care.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command the patient to raise his head, and cauterize that point with the cautery in the middle of the head; and if the beginning of watery discharge occurs on two temples, or on one temple if it begins on the eyelid, then cauterize on both sides.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that are left outside the spine, and those cauterizations are in that line near the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep an eye on the flow of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the flow of blood or serum, stay with the am for as long as possible, and give them any medicine you can.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And when you come to know what is extracted from the arteries and the abscess of those and the cauterization of the blood flow, then...
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes a person is cauterized in the neck, and two bones are left on either side of the cauterizations that are produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	This line seems to be discussing an ancient method of treating tears (lacrimas) using cauterization (cauterizac
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and occur in the veins and arteries that are located at the base of the skull and it is observed that there are superfluous flexed tendons, then cauterize those with a pointed cautery that have been found at the top of the head, starting from the beginning of the water that has been in the eyes, and cauterize in the middle of the nose and two cauteries in the temples, and two cauteries in the temples.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If you need to add something, then make points on the entire length of the hoof of the horse at its tip.
Capitol .xiiii.	123rd Capital
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate that which has been said in the division and does not utilize your medicine, then show yourself and give to the thighs of the patient three times; and remove the head of it, and cauterize the hoof with a larger cauterization than the previous one.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that hoof with a larger cauterization than the previous one, on the two tips of the hooves and the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep away from the arch that you did not incinerate there.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the cauterization of the hoof.
Capitol .xv.	15th Capital
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization of eyelid softening of the horses' eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the horse is softened by lack of care or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a larger cauterization than the previous one, and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you, make an incision on that side of the two thighs with a small cautery in the entire part, and let the pins be as long as the temporal bones.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cauterization should be according to the number of thighs.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not press too hard with your knife, but according to the size of the eyelid that is being cut.
Capitol .xvi.	Capital. Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the incision of the eyelid of the cat when the eyes are converted into parts of the fingers and hand of the cat.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyes of the cat are converted into parts of the fingers and hand of the cat, make incisions in those with two thumbs, cut or burn one, and use medicine as needed.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use fire to cauterize, command the patient to look at his eyes as they are seen by the ordinary person, and if the eyes are prolonged and extended; and if the hand is affected, then tighten the corners of the mouth with a pin so that it does not hurt when the eyes were born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When children and babies are born, pause the head of the tail at the tip, and place your hand over the outer edge of the corners of their mouth, as if it were the second figure of a skull, and this is the beginning of the gesture from the eyes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place a cut on the skin or in a moistened woolen cloth over the hair.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And light the cautery that is this the form of it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize over the figure that you have placed your hand on, little by little, in circular movements, until it is burned through the surface of the cloth that is like a skull, completely apparent actually.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And show the health of the second operation that you see the outer edge of the mouth being contracted and the eyes being raised, you must make the puncture in the mouth.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And raise your hand and let it be held by three fingers, and place your hand over the cut until it is burned through the scar.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And care for that as soon as it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the eye returns to its normal position due to any cause and the eyelid is softened, then make another point of cautery on that entire area as was first done.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the eyelid is inside the eye, then make a point of cautery at that entrance which is raised in the natural location and is uncovered and does not hurt the eyes.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	If the cautery is used in medicine as you command on the thigh that the eyelid enters which are prolonged and uncovered, and it is made of paper cloth in the shape of a mirror's frame.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some boiling water and a live coal. And, or as you please, and mix those causes with it, and make it fast for so that it is not burned; and expand it over the paper which is made in the shape of a mirror's frame, and place that over the other eye; and place the other eye in the album of the hand, and the head of the thigh in the top seat.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	When the physician pauses about the medicine and places his hand on the patient's thigh, the patient feels the warmth of the medicine, as if it were coming from a fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, when the patient feels the warmth of the medicine, the physician places his hand on the patient's thigh and warms it as if it were coming from a fire. When the warmth ceases, the physician removes the medicine with clean water; and the physician considers whether the eyelid has been cleaned as it should be, with the constraint of heat or cold, which is what you need. And if not, return to the location where the medicine was previously applied without damaging your operation and without contradicting the heat.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then stop on the border where the wound is, and cure that which is diseased with definicon or another within which it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to perform your operation that you guard against the neglect of diligence in the heat, and if the eyelid remains softened for several days and any cause of the piles in the heat, you must repeat your medicine over the location where the eyelid is softened, and return to the beginning as you did at first, and enter when it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of treatment for rheumatism.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You know that the pulses of men vary according to their size and thickness, and therefore the contraction is caused by this.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	When entering the anus for the purpose of examining that which is being studied in this art, do not make it painful by using force.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a fistula that has been said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confirm your cure, then you should cauterize as follows: command the disease to place its head in the inner side, and hold the head of the patient between the inner sides in such a way that it is not muddy nor agitated by the inside of the head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then stop the cut on the wound or on the mucous membrane of the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cauterization that is this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is complete, go as it is formed like a cane or a penis, from one end to the other where the cauterization is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, it should be inserted into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you want to be in a state of sleep as if it were a test.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	When it comes to that which is most difficult, it is better than the second work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if you press the fistula when it is opened, and between the disease and dryness, that.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the sore from there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place the cautery over it that is not yet ignited, and take hold of that which is better for the second work, so that you do not err in the part of the nose, and if the thigh is quiet, then leave the cautery on the gray of the husk and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the beginning of the cauterization enters the bone, it is; and if not, then you must repeat the cauterization one or twice, if necessary; and leave that there for three days, and place your hand over it to border and envi the cure as it dries inside so that it becomes healthy.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it were to take more than three days and not become healthy, then you must leave the acute corrosive medicine on it while the bone is discovered and is shaved according to what is convenient in the capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	When another needle for cauterization of the fistula is needed: find the location of the fistula and fit it in that place, then pause at that subtle opening; and pour in the quantity of one unc of blood fundament; and hold it with your hand, and do not damage the buttock because the blood fundament does not reach the hole of that; and cover it over the hole of the buttock with albumin or water, so that four drops of blood adhere to the location of the fistula and heal it for wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed as they have said about cauterization and cure, that is good; but if not, you must administer nasal ointment and reduce the fistula to the nose according to what is found in its place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterization of the fenestra, it can be done.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Wounds that are visible accumulate in fissures of the lips, and most especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you cure those fissures that they have told you in the divisions and do not abuse your care, you should use a small pointed cautery according to this form that it encircles:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And if it is the cavity of the fissure according to the subtlety of the cotella.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	When the wound has been cauterized in those fissures that it has reached to the bottom of the fissures, it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot with a pointed cautery.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And if those spots have healed within that they are sane.
Capitol .xix.	Capitulum XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cauterization of the fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the tip of the uvula, or in the palate, or in the corners of the teeth, there is an abscess and it bursts, and it heals over, and a fistula is formed, and you treat that and do not take advantage of the cure, as much fire cauterization as is received in the fistula, and put the fire in the opening of the fistula, and touch the fire with your hand inside where it goes to the bottom of the wound, and on the other side make a cut or two; and treat that as they have told us about the cure when it is sane.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the sore is suppurated and heals, it is; and otherwise, you must discover the place and open the bones according to what is said in your capitulum.
Capitol .xx.	The text you provided is a medical treatise written in a language that
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	1. "Capitol XX" - This likely refers to the Capitoline Museum in Rome, Italy, which was established in 1471. However, without more context, it's difficult to determine
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the angives are softened by humidity and the teeth are hard, and when those are treated with medicines but do not yield, then take the cap of the thigh in the upper end, and apply the cautery in the form that will best suit, as if you place the cushion over the tooth and enter it into the cauterization, which should be lit quickly and a little entrance should be made at the center of the thigh, where the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	When you lift your arm and repeat the cauterization on some points according to your will,
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And when the patient's mouth opens to drink water from the salty sea and holds it for an hour, and then it swells, with the tooth that is closed becoming stronger and the gum being strengthened and the corrupted moisture becoming dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol, Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of making points for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or in it is frost, or vermin, or the patient does not respond to medical treatment, then make points on it with two hands: either with a cautery of cow hide, or with a cautery of fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	A cowhide cautery is that which you take from the hide of a cow and burn it in the forge, and then cut it into pieces and wrap them around the extremity of the finger, and then press them against the painful tooth firmly, as soon as it is cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you find it, submerge the wool or cotton in the edge of that, and place it over the painful tooth, and place it over the fire that is ignited until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May I first ask for clarification on the source language? The provided text appears to be in Old French or Middle English, rather than a blend of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, I will do my best to provide a translation based on the given information.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And when you see the form of the cautery that will be, and place it on the tooth and touch it with your thumb inside so that the cautery is not too hot; and make some incisions there where the pain remains or on that day or on the other day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And cover that cautery with something that makes the patient's mouth open wide and hold it for an hour and remove the dough; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And make incisions with that which you see at the end according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	 And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cautery on extrusions.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrusions are of flesh and humors that are not obedient to digestion and you see that the digestive tract is only slightly affected by medications, then make sure to cut the cautery with the form that follows, having two ends for the smoke you need to take from the other end, and place it on the swelling with a incision, and if necessary, enter into the anus.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the gout is not severe, stop the cauterization according to the amount of gout, and then touch it with your finger for three days and place it on the side that is most painful to you because it has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And take care of that wound and try to dress it with what is most suitable for it, and enter if it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the needle or cautery is like this.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of gout and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When cold humors come over the lung's bronchus, and especially when it is very cold, you should make the patient evacuate the bowels with laxatives at the beginning of medication, and then cauterize that point on the gallbladder in the area that is inflamed.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And remember that you will not reach the gallbladder with the cauterization nor burn the dog's tail unless you use a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And you should cauterize that point with another cauterization on the joint of the knee in the corresponding iliac spine of the dog.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The corresponding English translation for "E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent" is: "And the cauterization of the foot should be done in the same manner
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	The corresponding English translation for "E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat" is: "And properly care for that one who has been treated and is now healthy.
Capitol .xxiiii.	The corresponding English translation for "Capitol .xxiiii." is: "Chapter
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	The corresponding English translation for "De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos" is: "Of the cauterization of lung abscess
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	The corresponding English translation for "Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent." is: "When the lung and chest have an abscess due to moisture, and the patient does not have a fever or chills, and it is an old abscess, then two points are made on the shoulder blade in the areas of the shoulders and back; and another cauterization is made in the chest between two milks; and the cauterization should be done in the same manner as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, your cauterization should be done with points on the cautery that is called a point, the form of which precedes in the pain of gout.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And if points are made inside the cells, and it is proper to care for that as it was before it became infected.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cautery has three horns for cauterization, then you can make three cauteries following this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Capital Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization of the boss that is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to watery lubricants and does not stop at the time of the return of the patient, and it is necessary to dislocate it in the way that it was before it was used, as we have testified, first reduce the dislocation as much as possible, and then place the leg on the side of the knee or on the hip; and then raise the rod that is in the part where the joint was dislocated, if the joint is dislocated in the parts of the fingers.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And approximately two caps of cauterization are needed; this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And approximately two caps of cauterization are needed for the tail that penetrates into the other part of the body; and this is the form of cauterization that doctors use, which requires four caps of cauterization.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And according to those subtle seconds, it depends on the amount of attempt; this is the form of cauterization:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some veins are adjusted according to this count and for these are the cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place your hand over the cauterization point, and make sure the hernia is held in place with adhesion, and the member does not become swollen for some time after it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in parts and tears, then doctors use cauterization on the muscle that is close to the clavicle or the point where the joint is confirmed, and the humidity is removed and the hernia is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain is felt in the stomach and moisture enters that particular part of the body, and if you continue with your curative maneuvers without confessing, it is likely that the thigh will become overly sensitive, and extend your hands and legs, and make three points on the affected area, using a cautery rod as much as possible, and two more cautery points on either side of the first point, until the figure of the triangular cautery is formed; and elongate the parts that are not adjusted to perform piercing.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two thirds of the length of the tailbone's groove.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the figure of the cautery is in this form, and if you wish, make a large cautery on the lower part of the stomach according to this form; and this will be a cautery according to the circle's form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is cauterized at the point that is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you touch over the stomach with a point according to the quantity you wish, and make three points on the cautery; and then cure that curative maneuver that was previously done until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	The text you've provided is in Latin, not a language similar to Italian,
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	I apologize for the confusion earlier. Here's the translation of the line: "Of the cauterization of the patient's foot
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When the pain in the foot is caused by coldness or humidity or large vesicle coming from the normal conjunctive, and the thigh is swollen due to excess exudation, and the patient complains of discomfort, it is necessary to cover the thigh with a resupinated dressing over the cervix, and then three cauterizations are applied in this form and quantity on the foot outside the hip bones, the hand holding the patient's decubitus.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	When there is an interval between the needles that corresponds to the largest part of the said body and the needles are inserted according to the length of the body's trunk.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do you not understand your own needle's purpose?
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of water that is added is equal to the quantity of the substance of the intestine, and there is no adjustment; and if the thigh is placed over the foot of the patient; and if not, then lift the hands, which have already spread their fingers, and raise the shoulders.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And are you able to use these needles as cauters, when you have skill and prudence in the art?
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, and add the substance of the entire intestine to what is added to the body, so that the entire body is subtle; and you know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitulum .xxviii.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the perforation of the aperture of the patient by the cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When the patient feels pain or an ache in the foot and wants to know if the pain is in the foot itself or in the surrounding tissue, if it is in the foot's tissue, the foot will become swollen and the pain will become severe.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the surrounding tissue, the pain will become sharp and severe, often wearing out the doctor's strength in treating the patient.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, cover the wound with a sheet over the neck; and then mark the location of the pain that caused the ache; and then choose the cautery that is most suitable for the wound, the form of which is provided in the next page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then cauterize it and cauterize within the belly if the entire coeca is burned, within if it reaches the umbilicus, within if it causes pain.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that by treating the other pains within if it is cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	However, this form of cauterization should only be used with the cautery that is studied in the art of medicine to prolong life and treat many diseases known; however, this has not been observed with any experiments on this operation, but rather it is recommended to us and is effective.
Capitol .xxix.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not in Latin,
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	De cauterizacio de plauresi" translates to "On the Cauterization of Plucking
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	This line seems to be discussing the use of cauterization in ancient medical practices, specifically for treating plucking (likely a reference to a surgical procedure). The text suggests that the user should follow this manual for cauterization and choose a long, dry razitz (which may refer to a tool or instrument) from the collection.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	When the affected area is submerged in oil and heated, and a cautery is applied at that location which is between the continuity of the clavicle and the collarbone; and two small cauteries are placed further away, one declining towards the part where the beard is left, and two cauteries are placed at the point where the fifth costal cartilage meets the hip bone, declining a little towards the regions behind; and another cautery is placed in the middle of the chest; and another over the stomach, and three cauteries on the regions behind; and one cautery is placed at the location between the two spines, and two cauteries on the two latissimus dorsi muscles, further away from the cauterization at the two spines.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	It is not necessary to buy your own ma if you have the cautery, just keep it in the manifest of the codex in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	It is already known to some that among the men who use cautries resembling rays and iron, and place them in the location between the ribs, when they pass through that aposteme and are removed outside, it has been said in the aposteme of the patient.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this incision with cauterization, there is no fear, for many have succumbed to the location where it was not possible to heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. translates to "Capitol Square
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	De la cauterizacio de la melsa translates to "From the cauterization of the table.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatro linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit. translates to "When you treat the female genitalia, it is said that the cure is in the division and not in your cure, then you should cauterize on it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three or four lines according to the length of the vulva according to the figure of the cauterizations of the patient, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment translates to "And between every cauterization there should be the largest part of a dit or a few mes, and the hand of the cauterization is the hand that has been said in the cauterization of the patient.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	When you do not understand your own wound; and the patient should be laying on their stomach.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	There is another way to cauterize, as you do not have the necessary instruments, which causes pain in the capital of muscle dislocation, and eviscerates the colon that is at the end of the table for the left thigh.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if your elevation is to raise the colon according to the length of the body, so that the points are cauterized according to the latitude of the chest.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then enter the two wounds, with caution, in that entrance where those passages of the colon of the other part are located.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cauterization; and it will be four points.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you see, cauterize with three wounds.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cauterization by pressing the bandage for several days, which is more comfortable than the previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital.xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	This line seems to be discussing cauterization in relation to gout (ydropici). A possible translation could
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not used in gout, but in certain cases of the foot.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat gout, use the remedies that have been prescribed in division and do not confuse your treatment with others. You cover that this cauterizes four cauteries around the abdomen and one cauterization on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the back, and two cauterizations between the vertebrae of the spine, and one cauterization in the right chest, and another cauterization on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization is proportionate to the spiciness of the cochlea.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And apply the cauterization carefully by making a cut that lasts for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the remedy of care apropos the cauterization that covers because they are added to the doses you receive, and it is quickly applied to help with the cure.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cauterization is that which is cauterized in the abdomen is clavilh according to the form of that which was previously described, and it is that which is cauterized on the thigh is olivar according to its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	The text you provided is not in a language similar to Latin, Italian
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	I apologize for the confusion earlier. The text you provided is in Spanish, specifically from the 16th century. Here's the translation of the
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with urine, it is customary to treat the feet with cauterization over the heel of the foot in cold water, as it is between the ear and the anus, and raise your hand, but not too tightly on the cauterization, and do not return to that position, until the urine is stopped.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The first source sentence translates to: "This is the cauterization method: On both sides of the thighs, make two incisions, and on each side, make a cauterization mark at the end of the cauterization blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	This sentence translates to: "And the cauterization should be according to the length of the thigh: and on one side, make the notch and the other, the other part of the thigh; and on each side, make two incisions.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	This sentence translates to: "And the wound should be kept clean for a long time, so that no poisonous liquid comes out.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	This sentence translates to: "And treat those causes that have been mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	This is a reference to a specific chapter or section in the text, but without
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	This sentence translates to: "Of cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	This sentence translates to: "When abdominal pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the body, it is due to the digestive and retentive vertuts, which are located in the stomach and intestines, and should be treated with care and not with harmful remedies, and sometimes the abdomen suffers from cauterization of the vertut exposed, make incisions on the upper part of the stomach according to what was done in the cauterization of the stomach, on the circular cauterization and on four cauterizations around the subtle circuit, on the clavilh subtle; and on the intestines over the large alois, or two incisions.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	If the humors are excessive and the body tolerates it, then you should cauterize that on the pentenilh and over the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries over the stomach and part of the thighs, which is a perfect cure for the lack of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The text you provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish,
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	However, it seems to be in a medieval form of Latin or a similar language. The first source sentence you provided, "Capitol .
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When in nature there are gouty or gross humors or corrupt humors, and they are cured by this that has been said in the division, and do not confirm the second cure, then it is necessary to cauterize three times on the two spines of the two small and small triangles, and cauterize the umbilicus cays for two dits.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you find that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient often blushes, then you should cauterize that over the stomach with a large cauterization; and one cauterization over the nail, and another cauterization over the palm of the hand, and leave the cauterization for some time, and cure the patient when it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol Section 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	The cauterization of the gallbladder should be done at its opening.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you squeeze the gallbladder, you must choose the cauterization that is most suitable for it.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place that ignited cauterization in the gallbladder abscess, and then close it with a tie, and enter when the cauterization reaches the orifice of the vein that carries the sac.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make a cut or an incision, if they are too large, then cauterize one of them after they have been found, and cure those that are nearest to the ones you have found, when they are healthy.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you use a large cauterization tool over a wound, it will not heal well.
Capitol .xxxvi.	This is not a sentence, but a reference to a specific section or chapter in
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of bumps that are natural in the body and appear in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in their place, the patient is frightened by this, and it is healthily done with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When a certain person has made a hole in the nature of the skin, and it is old, the flesh inside becomes corrupted and wet, and therefore it is fitting that one should cover that part with something that prevents the said hole from being seen, and accordingly knows the depth of the said hole in front of that attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	One uses a cautery that resembles a flame.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And one places the burning cautery at this hole and according to the quantity in which it goes into the attempt.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat over that until the corrupted flesh is completely burned, according to the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; or if the hole goes to the bladder or the bowel, you must be careful of all those places; and do not do this unless the hole is in flesh and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the place that has been healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and all the materials have been removed, and it remains for a long time, you know that it has been cured completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not of the patient's own, you should know that they penetrate or are in the pre-on of the body, corrupting the bones or causing such causes that will be remembered in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not in a language that is similar
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	To cauterization of the joints.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors or by large ventricles, and the thigh of the patient is swollen, it is necessary to know that cauterization is applied over the joints, and over each joint a cautery is applied as follows:
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And moreover, it is better to cauterize on the second joint, so that three lines of cautery are made, and thus fewer injuries are made in the future.
Capitol .xxxviii.	This is a source sentence for translation. Please provide the text you would like me to translate
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	To cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes thin and soft due to cold humors or water, and the patient's thigh is swollen, and the urine does not retain in the bladder, it is necessary to know that cauterization is applied on the first part of the urethra, as follows:
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery is according to the number of pores; and it is cauterized on the lower part of the two, or if necessary, on both.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	When the cautery clamp is processed, it should be.
Capitol .xxxix.	The text you've provided appears to be in a language that is somewhat similar to
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's a translation of the first line: "Capitol
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold humors enter the joints and women's parts, and it is prohibited to touch them, and they become corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs due to their movement, it is necessary to cauterize that location with three cauters in the ombelic circuit; and it is cauterized over the location where the two are placed, or two cauteries are used, and the cauter is a clavilh.
Capitol .xl.	The first line of the text is "Capitol .xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterization for the displacement of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When cold humors infiltrate the ankle part, and cause inflammation of the surrounding tissue, and since the hand is placed over the other when compared to them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the displacement becomes thin in that place.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is suggested that you cauterize the thigh over the ankle part of the patient with the pointed cautery placed as if to encircle the circumference of the ankle, and so that the ankle falls within the circle's center.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And this is the form of the cautery that precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries of the olive-oil cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the point according to the amount of the escutcheon of the entire codena; and cure that if it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xli.	I apologize, but there seems to be no text provided for translation in
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica" translates to "Of the cauterization of the sciatic nerve
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the region of the ankle, and the cause is cold and dryness, the leg is treated as if it has been said and not confirmed, and this is antiquated, and you cover that the leg with large amounts of powdered herbs or artificial powders or similar; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The maniac of the cauterization is followed by two more: either the cauterization is made by medical torches, or it is made with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The second scientific maniac is one of the three cauterizations made on the edge of the patient's thigh, and it should be done with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterization is determined by the size of the patient's body, whether it is small or large, and the cauterization tool should be chosen accordingly.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes the cauterization is made on the head of the patient's neck, and there are four cauterizations in total.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, you can cauterize on the circle that precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and it should be a continuous and burning circle that touches the entire spine.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the maniac of the cauterization in case of pain that adheres to the ankle and does not extend within the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it extends within the thigh, then cauterize that on two cauterizations on the thigh at the location where the maltue turns; and one cauterization on the navel for four days a little less than half of the ankle part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the cautery is sharp and its depth depends on the amount of intestine cut, then...
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the joint pain spreads throughout the area where the pain is felt, then...
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the joint pain extends to the other side of the thigh, then...
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	...and make sure that in the cauterization you do not use the cauterization as a burning wire or large arc, and that for this you are over the joint without causing pain or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one and another of those that were cauterized on the cavity and end of the cauterization, and the fire inside burned until the tumor achieved the foot, and the fire melted and corrupted the whole foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And a very acid solution of the stomach, and then death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts and cauterizes each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the doctors advised in the cauterization of an acid cauterization of the kind this is the method: make it resemble a circle of iron of which the circuit is the largest of a palm; and it should be the size of the orifice according to the largest of a bone or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	When the fire is placed in the fireplace and begins to glow, and when it is placed on the ankle, the patient should lie down on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that point with three cauterizations in one spot.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then press that point for three days; and then clean the wound with clean water for several days; and then cure that wound when it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Albucasis: Oh, children, of this type of cauterization few have used because of the fear of the observation of it, and for that few have found those who observe it over it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More of the points are cauterized on the one who suffers, and reduces that place for him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More cauterizations are used in medicine because you make two circles with armored holes perforated in the one where the guzzler of the ferry's mouth is; the length of the sides is in the naughtiness of them, or two noses or those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is less than the quantity of the size of it; and they are opened further and deeper, and they contain inside each other in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	When the patient's ankle is paused over the wound of the foot, and your hand is placed on the ankle; and take hold of the cold water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that is like the heat of a small fire, and it lasts for the quantity of one hour, and the patient suffers from the biting and the adhesion of the foot - when that biting stops as if from the heat - then enter if the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the cold water from the entire ankle with the necessary water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And press that for three days and place your hand on that border when the adhesion remains unbroken, and press that for several days, and run over the wound; this is beneficial in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with a poultice when it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or leg, make the statue in it that contains water according to what is made in the ankle engagement.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the maniac's water bucket, and you have already written this in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and caus that is not extinguished in one part of the body, and cut and stop it in a new wave of the quality of which the part is left perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And stop the fountain of the other wave that is carried away, and place over that live alkali and caus with twice the amount that requires it for a day, and understand that those are good for the second part, and let the hot water flow from the cold water in the part that has been left in the carried-away wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And adjust the entire water as needed, and place over another live alkali and another novel alkali, which requires a strong acuity, that is maintained in motions of medicine and cauterization of other members, which operation is like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines are some that are cauterized wide, and you should see how they are sewn with thread and wax and caustics, and you will understand that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if there is a cold wound, and it is not bleeding, then the recently cut uterus should be held in a few grays and placed over the bone or muscle or chest where the pain is, and it should be observed.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	If it is to be stayed for three hours or until the amount of pain that the malady causes is reduced by half.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put it in a warm place and when the body of the patient is swollen, enter that into the soil, and the pain will cease and be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Do you know that not all doctors use cauterization for these medicines except for the removal of the body?
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays has already said that when a goat's tooth is cut, the stretched vein is cauterized, take advantage of this; and the cauterization in this manner: hold the hair and wet it with old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And if you hold a dry and inflamed goat's tooth and insert it into the wound that is swollen, and place it over the hair and let it enter until it is stretched.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	When you have finished doing this, do not stop until that tingling sensation from the bite of the gout passes through the knee and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol .xlii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided does not appear to be a
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	De cauterizacio de dolor de dos" translates to "Of cauterization of pain from two
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas" translates to "Some painful spots are in the feet due to several causes.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	When cauterization is not done in this specific manner, which is made by the emission of wasteful matter, it should be avoided.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, the evacuation of the wound should be done with pills and semblances that are similar to them, which are placed over two lines according to the latitude of the patient, as long as there is a tenth in each line for cauterization or more, according to the tolerance of the wound and the virtue of the patient.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And it is called cauterization when cauterization is done with a point.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you want, cauterize by three or four points, or by one point on the median clavicle according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Capital.xliii. (This is a reference to a specific chapter in a legal
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Regarding the beginning of cauterization with gilbertism.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Observations have been made on this wound in small children; and since the beginning of the wound in the children, it has caused a structure in the limbs, elevation, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And the muscles of the lower back and neck of the patient have started to overcome the others in height.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	When you see this and want to prohibit it, then burn the point that is pointed next to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	 and hold the cautery on the entire part of the spine where the hernia is located.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, burn in the circuit of the spine with the cautery of two or three points.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And these points should be placed between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then care for the place where it is healthy, as they have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May you keep in mind that cautery should not be administered in a yellowish place that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol.xliv. (This is a Latin term that means
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then how is gout caused by cold humors in the hand and not relieved by medicine, you have to burn it.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	When you are about to cauterize that approximately evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot, make sure to do it at the right angle.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And is this the form of the cautery you are using?
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain spreads to other joints or the knees, and it is necessary to stop it, then cauterize that on each joint with three or four points of this cautery or olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard on the cautery before, just so long as it is only in the specific area of the codena.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain spreads to both knees, then administer the cautery that was said in the capital case.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is in the most, and it is called sugar, then make points on the circuit of the foci auscultation as they rotate, make points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain persists in these parts, then make points on the circuit of the nails over each toe and on the tip of the big toe.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain subsides to some extent in the knees or muscles, then make points on all parts of the helper's legs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not remove the patient's good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is well-regulated and clean, this cauterization will be effective, and God will help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of Cautery for Wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the wound is in the ankle and thigh, and the intestine is coming out through the hernia, then you should ask the patient to eat less on that day and use gentle remedies for it, so that the suture does not cause pain.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient over their shoulders on the side of the abdomen, and command them to hold the abdomen firmly when it seems to be getting larger or the hernia to appear or the intestine to come out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the thighs as you have tried to break it over the bones of the patellar tendon and signal the end of which is similar to the circle of the gout in the subcutaneous parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery of which this is the form of it:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Then if it is red and has a sharp point.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then pause the cautery on that end which you have with your hand, and if it enters the bone of the patellar tendon into the meat of the thigh; and repeat this on the other side if you have not succeeded in the first attempt into the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the state of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, so as not to burn that intestine because it does not come out of the thigh or other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	You should know that when you touch the cautery with your mouth, do not pay attention to the bones, and do not confirm your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the cauterization of children should be gentle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then care for the cauterization site for three days, so that the burn of the fire does not become more painful.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And care for this with the other guests until it is cured.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	Then let the wound be covered over the back for fourteen days, until it is sealed and the plague is healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And know that you should pause the nutrition according to the length of time it takes to cure the patient, and that the intestine will not protrude due to the effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to leave for fourteen days, administer decent care to the wound, and hold it for another fourteen days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it is necessary to work and eat and drink, and to make great efforts, when you use this entire regimen of healing, your health will be improved.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	When you describe the cure for ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and so begins, and you want that they do not tighten, then you cauterize the rupture with that cauterization red on according to the quantity of the patient, and it should be as if it is extracted from the codena as the last part of the patient; and you cure that rupture as you have said, and it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	It has already been said at the beginning that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cauterization according to this form, because it is more effective.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed perpendicular to the latitude in the latex, and another line below it; and you remove your hand but leave a clavicle cauterization, which is better than the first cauterization that was placed further up.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 66.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of twisting.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in certain members due to tightness or impact and persists for a long time and does not relieve the patient's discomfort, it is necessary to cauterize with a point cauterization.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	When the cauterization is made on any part of the body according to its size and thickness, strength, and development, and location of twisting and pain in the body.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the patient is healed by the first cauterization, then it is; and if not, repeat the cauterization over that part; four out of five punctures are usually made on the member of one part of the body to which the other part of the body is closest, so that you can insert those points inside the patient's thigh when the member is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some legions are made by cauterization with a great force, and less if the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of fat and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And if you want to cauterize that part, consider if the leprosy is ulcerated and whether it has been cured as they say in the division and not done, nor yet, and fears about the thigh that corruption comprehends the whole body of you and all the complexion of you, then cauterize that on the head with a point of cauterization: one point on the side of the head, and another further down from there, and bring it to the end of the hair; and two points on the cheek or servants; and one last one, behind the ear or on the nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	When the last is done, your cautery is a little pressure on the bone, and the scars are moved aside, so that the expulsion of large vapors is relieved from the body; and it is cauterized over the table next to what is required.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the thigh and is clearly visible, you should believe that those cauterizations that have been told about them are on the head; and cauterize on the extremity of the nose, and two on the upper lip, and two on the lower lip, and two on the spines of the neck, and one on each shoulder blade, and one on the chest, and one over the hips near the anus, and one on each anus, and one on each nipple, and one on every nipple, and one on every muscle; and cauterize all those joints of the bones that have been told about the thighs and feet, and on every toe of the feet, and on the foreskins of the hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	When you are looking for the nerves that are above the sole of the foot where they do not burn,
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	When certain points are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the pelvis and on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the thigh, it is called pelvic cauterization.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	The more points you cauterize, the less beneficial and less effective it is; and you know that the pelvis does not cause pain in the cauterization, as long as they are placed according to their own needs, because the body of the patient has already become stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And the size of the cauterization depends on the limbs and joints according to which species of tools are followed.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then, after the cauterization, it is appropriate to apply flour of errors, honey, and the other remedy until it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Chapter on Cauterization for Stunnedness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb becomes numb or unconscious and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not become healthy, you should cauterize that numb limb according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When the hot iron is inserted into the anus of the body, a few times.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then, take care that it becomes healthy if it is sane.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	For some wounds, the area is cauterized with a certain stupefying substance that affects the bones of the feet, and the spine of both sides, and the symptom of the nerves that affect that member, and it is relieved by the stupefying substance.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	This is not excessive, except for that which is known about the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves that move the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitulum .xlix.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization of warts that are dying.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the warts are old and do not satisfy the doctor's treatment, then you should cauterize over that which is on fire with a hot iron a few times after the quantity of the anus has been entered into, and the whiteness and color of it have become relieved. The color of it has changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And take care that it is made of flour and lentils, olive oil, and arugula leaves, and chicken or hen's egg, and each part is mixed together, and place a cloth on it and keep it at the location where it becomes healthy.
Capitol .l.	I apologize, but the provided text does not contain the word
De cauterizacio de cranc.	I apologize, but the provided text does not contain the phrase "de cauterizacio de
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, you should cauterize that point with a circular cautery on the circumference of the skin as it turns.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that the point that is cauterized at the back of the cauterization is the most painful; I have not seen this before, but I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have seen some wounds like this before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	When a wound is to be cauterized in the circumference of the member, it can be done with a pointed cautery or a hot iron.
Capitol .li.	I'm sorry, I don't understand this. Could you please provide
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	The process of cauterization involves applying heat to a wound to stop bleeding and promote healing. This can be
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess takes a long time to mature, and it is due to excessive inflammation, or the state of the member is decrepit, with few sanguineous vessels, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize in the circumference of the member with a small cautery point; and afterwards apply a poultice to that part where it is about to rupture.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a hole in the cauterized part, then you should know that this is the form of the cauterization: and slowly advance it into the abscess cavity when the point penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization is done in that place where I left it, so that the pulse of the arm becomes regular; and afterwards cure that within which it is healthy.
Capitol .lii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	That is Latin. The translation of "De cauterizacio de corrodent" is "About the
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is a term used in medicine to describe a type of gout. The sentence translates to: "Corrodent is an ambulatory inflammation that affects the member, which corrodes it as if it were dry wood." In other words, corrodent is a form of gout that affects the extremities, such
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	The translation of "Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent" is: "Therefore, if you sometimes find the corrotent in the location where it suffered cauterization with fire, then you should use few cauterizing pins and large ones as appropriate for that location where the corrotent is." In other words, when treating a
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	The translation of "E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e non romangua alcuna causa de lu" is: "And if you cauterize it completely throughout the affected area and do not find any cause for it." In other words, when cauterizing a corrotent
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	The translation of "E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio" is: "And continue to treat it for three days, and then stop over the cauterized areas with olive oil mixed with a little alcohol as soon as all the scars are completely removed and the corrosion is eliminated." In other words, after treating
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then apply this remedy to that part of the flesh that is causing pain.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the flesh does not heal in that area and does not become corrupt, then so be it; otherwise, you will repeat the cauterization over the areas that are hardening in the corrupt parts.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And if they become rotten, some doctors treat them with acute medicine, which is placed in the place of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization is not always effective and can sometimes make things worse.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already spoken of the medicine used in the division and when it will be necessary to apply it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of claws and the like.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Wounds that are visible on the parts of the foot that are causing the claw and are large, rough, which cause the foot to be painful; and cauterization is performed on those areas with two fingers, which is done with hot iron and with cold iron tail.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cauterization with hot iron is that which resembles a torch, which is made of iron similar to the quantity of iron contained in the claw of the entire part, and is made of thin blades.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then pause the fire on the lock, and then rotate your hand with it, but use the cautery around the lock as it comes to the depth of the lock.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The first source sentence to translate is: "E le
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	This line can be translated as: "And apply an ointment made from salted honey to that part, and leave it there for a day, so that it may be eliminated from its wounds.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	When treating an area that is inflamed due to generated flesh, it should be treated when it is healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not convert, and visible ulcers appear on the surface of the body, particularly on the chest and feet, you should know that you are administering poison in those cauteries, and that you are holding a blister or a nail or a piece of iron over the claw; and you should get a small amount of watery exudation on it, and close it with your hand, and then rotate the claw around the stem of the claw, and make the marge of the canula touch the tip of the claw preon, and wait for the ulcer to drain through the preon of the claw for about an hour, and then remove it, making sure that the claw is in its original position.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And it is necessary to do this for all those that come over the other parts of the body that are in the chest.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And treat those pus that the razits of the claws are eradicated as if they were inflamed by the generated flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	The first line of the text is "Capitol .liiii." However
De cauterizacio de tremor.	This line can be translated as "From cauterization of trembling." In this context, "cauterization
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	This line can be translated as "When trembling is caused by cold humors in the nerves or by fever of that nature, or by another cause seeming so, then you should know that you cauterize that part with four cauteries or one over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cauterization; and you cauterize on the chest of the patient, and over the stomach of the patient, you cauterize with gallotries.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the trembling of the patient subsides and the health of the affected part improves, it is then that the doctor can begin to treat the disease.
Capitol .lv.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text "Capit
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	This line seems to be a continuation of the previous one and can be translated as: "However, injuries from cauterization are common in the body
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When injuries appear in the body, and pustules form which are caused by fatty, corrupt materials; therefore, as in the beginning, it is recommended that the cauterization be made over the entire circumference of the cautery wound, which is subtle and ends at the focus; or from a long process; or from a slow cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	When some warts are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and it is not surprising, and it breaks the superfluity, making those healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	When I say that this is indeed an evacuation of cold humors through the gout, it is.
Capitol lvi.	This line appears to be a Roman numeral, which translates to
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	By cauterization of the flow of sang through an incision of the arkerium.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When swollen troops are seen flowing from the arch, which is incised to relieve the plague that defeats it, or to incise the stitch or cauterization of the member, and then it seems, and it is difficult to remain with that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	And when you have caused the gout, then you should cut off a piece of your own skin and place it over that, which is the end of the incision where the flow of the arch was, and that which is not yet defeated. And do not let it.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place a few and large green cauteries in the fire, by name, and exhale over those when they are not yet ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take a small or large part of that location and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein firmly pushed that would have remained of the said member, and then you should cauterize it when it is cooled and restricted to that wound.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the wound is expelled from the arch of the artery when you remain with the said member and remove the cauterization, then take another sharp cauterization from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and therefore do not stop doing this until the wound is firmly restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	When you are about to perform this procedure, be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and be aware that it may cause harm to the other part of the body.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	You know that when the artery flows with blood, it is not possible to control it in those restraints, and especially when the artery is large, if not with one of four hands: with cauterization as said before, or with extraction if it is not extracted, four when it is extracted, the extremities of the veins are burned and the sac is restricted; or that it is stretched over the medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the sac; and they are strong on the pulley and subject to constraint.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	Only he who administers the proper restriction of the artery and stricture by strips or by position of ignitable causes and similar, will not feel only a slight pain.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If you do not have a physician or medicine at hand, then perform the point of the indicated sign on the wound of that vein as said before, and understand the great compression of the entrance of the sac that the sac is outside the diseased part of the plague, and over the artery it is not harmed; and over the artery it is splashed with cold water from a large coldness when the sac is tightened and engorged; and do not worry if you have to cauterize or use medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second part of the treatment begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	This includes incision, perforation, venting, and plague-like wounds and their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are phrases from Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter, it has been stated that when cauterization is necessary and appropriate for the disease and its causes, and the instruments required are in the right forms for the cauterizations, then the chapters of the subalternation of the head between the feet have been ordered.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the client may be satisfied with this, and you will do what is required.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And since you began this chapter, son, son, that in this chapter there is fear for you that there is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And since you are afraid of this, son, that in the operation which is in this chapter, which is seen to be removed, there should be great caution, because in the operation which is in the first chapter, the vein is cut or the aposteme is incised or the exsiccation or purification of the plague is extracted or the stone is excised or the incision of the peyra and its appearance.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	When all of these symptoms accompany fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death follows.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I advise you not to fall into the trap of this, as some people with rough hands may require your assistance due to their poor hygiene.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And it is said that if you go to their malady and they are in poor condition, and you must treat them for their malady, and because of the severity of the malady found in their malady, and due to the length of the malady of the patient, and the malady is a sign of death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And for those who give you power and knowledge, you hope for that cure, and the dangerous disease is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And do not think that you agree to the one who shows you the hand of which this is; and your caution should be greater than what you cover and your greed; and do not assume any cause for this except certain science that proves this to you, and that leads to a blessed success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the treatment of all your patients for prognosis and indication of the one who is converted to health, wherein you assist them over acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God grant you understanding and not leave you without direction and protection, for this is in your hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	You and I have ordered this capital to be distinguished from the capitals that precede it in the capital of cauterizations, of the cure of the foot within the feet, so that you may be able to find here what you asked for and of which there is indeed a need.
Capitol primier.	The first source sentence is "Capitol primier," which trans
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	The translation of "De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz" is: "Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of the children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You should know that these symptoms in children are part of their development and when the year is new, the child's head begins to grow.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are caused by insufficient moisture, which is not cleaned.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this malady in adults alone; and all those that I saw were dying, and for that reason I saw many operations done on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I saw that a child's head was full of water, and the head of the child was entirely magnificent until it could not be touched because of its great size, and less when the moisture increased until it could not be touched because of the fire of death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is either added between the ribs and the bone, or it is added later over the bones on the chest.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the operation is done in that case when the moisture is between the ribs and the bone, and the scar is small, you should cut in the lower part of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure is two notches within which the moisture runs, and this is the form of the sputum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If humidity increases and the aposteme becomes greater, you will find two fissures in this manner according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If humidity has reached the bones, and you notice that the commissures of the cut-open head are wet and slippery when you touch them with your hand, it is likely that the blood has flowed out of the parts connected to the intestine, and it is not coming out of your body.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cover that you cut in the middle of the head three fissures according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract the incision from all the humidity; and stretch the fissures on the draps and plumassols; and cover it over with something and let it soak in water for five days, and care for the wound that you have made and engorge, and stretch the cap equal to the size of the member that is comfortable and healthy. And eat the dry member that has been soaked in water.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another incision method to consider, which is more suitable for the size of the aposteme and the collection of blood, where some veins are less in the occipital region, or in the part that comes down, or on the right side, or on the left side; and then aten am the incision where the aposteme and the repletion of the blood appear, and see if it is possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	You should observe whether the artery is not cut and does not cause any obstruction, as the patient's leg becomes wet with that flow of blood due to evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the cutting of the arteries that are closest to the ear, called hilasses.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Third.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When the blood is forced into the cats or rams' horns, or chest, and it becomes known, and no cure is given by the physicians, then you should follow this method in this case of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to cut those that the patient wants to have, and surround the place with a damp cloth as hard as possible to open the arteries, and hold tight the leg of the patient's foot; and consider where the vein is located; and the places of those over the places where the hairs are depressed, and so hide them as much as possible in some men's homes.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And cover the artery you want to cut, and cut through each part of the hard point that is cut inside the bone, and let it be known by the pain that comes from the head, and that is due to its latitude.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, enter the spatula here and follow the artery to those parts of it that are affected.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is twice that of the depth, then when any vein is cut, the vessel is easily exposed to exit pulsation, which causes it to collapse. This is due to the frequent sound.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear at the incision, then you should measure the radius of the abdomen to the amount of three inches, and then press on it, and then enter the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And if you cover the incision with a piece of gauze and press on it as much as possible, and then as little as possible, and then according to the amount that appears in the beauty of the thigh and the repletion of the artery, it is.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And if you consider the plague, and then if you are on the bone any cause of pressure, then you should cut there according to what does not cause aphte cauterization.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you stretch the plague with threads and with hair, and then cure it according to what is inside that is healthy.
Capitol .iii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	I apologize, but the provided text does not seem to be in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in a different language or a mix
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	I apologize, but the provided text does not seem to be in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in a different language or a mix of languages. Could you please provide more context or check if the text is in a different language? I'd be happy to help translate it into English if I can determine its language.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	I apologize, but the provided text does not seem to be in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in a different language or a mix of languages. Could you please provide more context or check if the text is in a different language? I'd be happy to help translate it into English if I can determine its language.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	I apologize, but the provided text does not seem to be in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in a different language or a mix of languages. Could you please provide more context or check if the text is in a different language? I'd be happy to help translate it into English if I can determine its language.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And you take the salve of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	When you approach the abdomen, first heat the cloth with that oil that facilitates entry; and then gently pull it out and extract that from the surrounding parts that you extract from the belt and discover those of the tunics that are left behind in that part, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, wrap that around the end of the finger and insert one part after another according to the quantity by which they are stretched at the ends of the fingers and are contracted, and if it does not leak blood, then it will not be able to rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And remove the sand from the three parts.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, then cover that in two places with something firm but not too long, and do not close it to the putridity coming out of the consolidation of the plague and preventing blood flow.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And cut off the excess that is between two limbs; and do that at that time or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery inside the bone inside which the incisions of the finger are and stay in place of that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better work if the disease is not fever or of the sloughing complex; rather, cauterization is of those causes that help with damp inflammations, and therefore it is better in the treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	When removing the archives that obstruct the ancient location of the knee, and place them on the smooth parts of the leg appropriately, and apply your care as a physician to make the flesh and tendons more healthy and enter the state of being healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while working another vein appears to flow from the arch, then you should tighten that vein with your hand or with a cauterization, or by pressing on the knee area and strengthen it within which the vein is being held back.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If the cause of those is not with you, then place your hand on the part mentioned above where the vein is being held back, and wrap the area with wet cloth around which the wound has healed, and it will be strengthened afterwards as before.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that is why when removing the arch you use cauterization on the vein, as this cauterization has two points, and you have seen the two loci am tendon, and it has been stopped, that is, when they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it is elongated as much as possible between the extremities of the same, which are not supported by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of cauterization:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by do
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if it is less severe pain in both knees, then if it is more acute, it is better to have two knives, and do not insert them quickly into the flesh.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, if there is any swelling in those, the heat of the fire is applied to those and the flesh is slowly removed.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all its parts and puts up with less.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two knees is the quantity of the swelling of the said.
Capitol quart.	Capital fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of the chest for acute and acidic wounds of the heels.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the wounds are acidic, and the chest of those veins which are over the test of the head deformed, and do not agree with any cause of medical cure, and sometimes the face of the knee already turns and feels like it is walking on ants, and the heels of that are extended, humidifies as if the eyes of their legs were cut off, the tears are scalped by the acuteness of the tears, the old grease in the cure of those of this operation, and do not spare it.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	When you command the patient to extend their arms that are in front of them, and insert three incisions into the front, separated by about the length of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the length of the incision is two thirds, the first will be distant from the length of the nose in the middle location of the front, and the second will be a little behind the movement of the fingers that are in the lacrimal, and the third will be on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And keep an eye on the incision of the fingers that are in two thicks, and extend your hand for the continuation of making bones of the jaw.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If the space of each incision is equal to three thirds adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have a sponge pad or cloth that absorbs moisture for those that dehydrate the skin.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And place the sponge between the two sharp edges, of which this is the form of the incision of the one:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the beginning of the template to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	When pain is felt in the entire chain that passes between two incisions on the hip bone, and it moves to the second incision, it is called gout by doctors.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then, take another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and dull on the other, and enter into the first incision.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then, place the blade of the scalpel on the fatty tissue of the chain, and the handle on the bone, and enter wherever it went through the fissure, and cut off all those that descend from the head to the toes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	May it continue the incision, and move to the second fissure within the chain.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And push that portion of the spine, extract the joints of the spine connected to it.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then, stop in any fissure that has an old cut, and place your hand on those powders, filled with oil and vinegar, and see if it does not produce a sting from the cauterizing instrument.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day, the limb becomes inflamed and a large amount of water or pus is excreted, and it is carefully cared for with balsam or rose oil and other remedies that are applied to the affected areas.
Capitol .v.	Capitol version 1.0
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	The treatment of sprains by braiding and the descendants of the parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When cold humors enter the joints and continue to cause pain, and sometimes the corners of the mouth become quite thin, and one looks at them with great difficulty, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the eyes are affected by this, it is known that these accidents occur due to the materials and joints not being able to get from the vessels of the parts of the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for this is to command the head that it will be flat, and to insert a fissure in that part of the front, a small one at the lower location of the forehead (and start from the left temporal fissure to the right temporal fissure; and insert it into the bone; and stretch your finger through the lats of the temples that are flat enough for mastigation), and when you reach the bone.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	When all the dry skin is scraped off or torn away, and then it is filled in between the lips of the fissure or the folds of the skin, it is called exsicca.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply powder made from finely ground chalk and oil to prevent the skin from becoming inflamed after cauterization.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the inflammation has decreased, know that the cauterization has been effective and that the chalk powder has penetrated into the flesh as it begins to enter the wound, and apply this regular exsicca to reduce the inflammation in the flesh, just as if you were mixing wheat flour with four parts of coal and one part of water and applying it to these plagues on the native skin.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	About the treatment of this remedy that is applied to the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	In total, that which is applied to the ears is one of four types, either a mineral stone or something that resembles a stone, like iron and silver, or it is from a plant, like chamomile or fennel, or it is a cause of fluxion, like water and vinegar, or some kind of animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	When joint pain is present in the knee or another cause appears similar to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the knee, and stops the knee to the sun, and if the pain occurs, distillation is done in that one specific cause of olive oil or ointment, and properly assists in the extraction of it, and makes the patient return to the condition before the extraction, and releases the nails for the outcome of the extraction.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And stops at the circuit of the knee around some sacks of wool or fabric, and extends the knee to the parts thereof, where four points are forgotten as to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not obtained, assists in the extraction of the knee with the instrument called the epicicario's handle, which is the form of this:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten, then so be it; and otherwise, assists in the extraction of the knee with a subtle instrument of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not forgotten for this, then you make a cannula of aram and enter the end of the cannula into the track of the knee and close the end of the cannula with wax and ointment softened so that it is not opened except the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	When the wind is particularly strong and attracts many flies, too many have been seen with it.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If one does not forget in this manual, you can take hold of the ambush or the disguise as it appears to be on the part that is pregnant with a catapult, and place it at the end of the ray, and gently cover it over the corner of the decent couch.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then enter that in the throat of the turtle with ease, and remove the moisture from the turtle.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if one does not forget about all those that have been seen, then you can cut at such a place where the gout or spasm appears to be coming from, and apply cauterization or electrosurgery.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manual of such a cut is that you start by cleansing the vein of the sephasic and extracting it after the manual of virtue, and then place that cezer between your hands and convert the turtle into parts, and if a small fissure appears in the neck of the turtle, you must remove the blood from the location where it is most premeggut.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	When the lunar fissure is found within the foot, and the foot is wasted, leave it there as much as possible; and at that time, with the speed you can manage, close the opening within the foot to make it heal.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the pain is one of the grease that has been consumed and inflamed, you should administer the treatment and extract from it; but if you do not obey my instructions, you should take subtle water in this way:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	 and administer to that the treatment of that part of the foot that is inflamed.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that part has been humidified by the vapor of the foot, and stop that movement, and take out that from there using needles or subtle gestures, or if it is necessary, use a sharp instrument to extract it.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	 And in the water that is inserted into the foot, which the patient uses for sneezing to condition the beginning, and fill the auricle of the ear with wax, and place the wax on the auricle where the water is, and if for that reason it is forgotten, do not; and if not, take several peas and leons according to the length of the same, and heat them in the fire a little, and the patient puts one of them in the corner of the ear and presses it on the other part of that part with a pea over the ear that is dintz the auricle.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop applying this remedy as soon as the entire urine is lost.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the urine is completely lost in your hand, whether you use paper or a gown, and place the other end of the remedy in the anus and extend the other end outside, it will be consumed by the urine of the patient.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place as many gauzes as necessary inside the patient's body when all the urine is lost, and tighten that part with a catheter to prevent the excess stone from coming out.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When removing the intestine from the anus, if it is small, use great care and as the doctor has said in the division; but if it is of great size, administer the removal of the intestine, stomach, and other organs, and the cause of this will be recognized as one of all the causes that are found in the anus.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	When removing the worm from the anus, if you administer that which has been said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not comfort your patient, then cover the anus with a cloth in the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If here any cause of the gallstones is found, take out that part with your hand or with one of these subtle tools, but if no cause is found, take a rigid canula and push it through there and this is the form of this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	When the end is gently entered into the anus according to the quantity that it suffers from the disease; and then succor is given with what is suitable for relief, and gentle thrusts are made, entering until all the verms are forced out.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey my instruction, then you will ask for and receive the key to the canula, as they have said; then administer distillations of those that have already expanded in the cura of the verms, and find this in the section of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And is your effusion the one that funds the medical oils in the anus of this instrument, which is this form of the same?
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of iron, straight, in which there is a small pouch, and I will please you with it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so be as they are in the cavity of the canula of this place where necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it gently around the end of the anus slightly curved, and place oil in the concavity of the ear, or from any herb, or that which you want of these medicines in the canula — and this is in the anus —, and gently enter the ray into the concavity of the ear and expel it when the oil has been expelled in the concavity of the ear and the disease feels the oil.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	When someone is enveloped in the glove and it is already tight around the hand, it should be cut with a sharp knife.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you distill in the glove is not too cheap, for otherwise the remedies made from gloves will suffer from this.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol, Volume VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the treatment of glove inflammation.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some have noticed that in the bellies of old women, and even in men, there is inflammation of the glove, which has also occurred in some men; and this inflammation is caused by plague or by nothing in that; and this inflammation is found in the preon of the wound of the glove that does not have its proper shape, and some are found in the parts that are deformed.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And if this inflammation occurs in the preon of the wound of the glove that does not have its proper shape, it is found in the major dispositions for difficult treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And if you manage to have the shape of the glove, keep the glove of the thigh against the sun and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If sometimes there is apparent swelling, open that soft sponge which is this form of the medicine:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the one in which the smallest latitude is found, where one part is acute and the other is not; and the sweat is from two legs according to which does not cause pain to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the opacity is found in the ear or in the flesh of the patient, then use those thin nails and apply that strong force when it is completely stopped.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if opacity is found on the surface of the ear, then use thin leather and heat that part slightly, and place it in the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you smell opacity in me that the thigh becomes harder and more difficult to straighten, due to excessive effort, the pressure of the foot on the difficulty is reduced; and keep in mind not to damage the earner's nerves.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And stop in the ear the second part of the thigh that you have enveloped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or if you press on that part with your hand and moisten it with water and powder over it according to what suits you and use it from you; and if the ear becomes swollen, then make sure that you do not damage that part and change it with another part that you envelop in cortex that is redish-yellow, when it is the swelling that is about to disappear; and take care of that within what is healthy.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If one experiences the flow of blood from a wound, submerge the sponge or cloth in clean water and place it on the forehead, and use another remedy that restricts the flow of blood, which is called in the chapter of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	About the cure of conjunctivitis, which ends up in the eyes.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Conjunctivitis occurs in the eyes due to some fevers, some being dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you have those threads or strings, and cut them at the ends of the spots, and place them over the areas as desired.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If one experiences pain from the flow of blood from a wound, you should then cauterize those points with a fine cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the points are made with sharp knives and the wounds return to their original state when any cause for those spots is removed; and when the cauterized spots are burned, those spots do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	This appears to be a description of a medical treatment for swollen eyelids (palpebras). The text suggests that the treatment involves applying a certain substance or remedy to the affected area.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	This sentence suggests that red spots or stains appear on the eyelids due to some cause, which is believed to be related to the patient's age and hardness. These spots are then referred to as "grandissa.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	This sentence indicates that there is an addition of thick moisture on the outer and inner edges of the eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	The operation on them is considered necessary if the swelling is caused by something that appears on the eyelid and is harmful to the entire organ; and the cause of this is unclear.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, it is necessary to make an incision on that side of the fissure, and then suspend that part from the entire organ, and then cut away that part.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if you are not aware of the incision point, and do not push through the eyelid into the incision, it is possible that you may not be able to perform the operation in the same way.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the size is large, you adjust it with suture; and care for that after it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is small, it will not be beneficial for that part of the gout to restore and regenerate that and regenerate.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the swelling decreases to the edges of the eyelids, you must superficially examine the eyelid and suspend the swelling at one end, another that you will recommend for incision, and press on that part of the whole eyelid, and if the eyelid is elongated due to incision, it will not be noticed in the same way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the wound with saltwater; and care for the area that is regenerate within which it was once healthy.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure for the swelling in the eyelid's edge of the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Swelling is caused by the one that is generated in the layers of the eyelid's edge, and particularly in children, it aggravates the wounds of those and causes them to cut their nails on that part; and they cannot see the clarity of the sun for that reason when they have lagremas in those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	For so you sometimes see those who sleep on their faces, and on their faces during the day; and at the corners of their eyes, which have been covered by inflammation and imminence of an infection, and then you notice that when you place the locum am the tieus, it centes accernac entro aquels.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	When the surgeon performs an operation on the patient's thigh, they pause the leg at the desired height, and then pause the drapes of limbs and feet to prevent inflammation, and make a circle around the amount that contains the necessary parts, and place it over that and press with the hands of all parts of the body to add more cartilage to the circumference of the circle, and then encircle the circumference of that humidity that spatulates in the incision of the fissure, and the fissure is not larger than the fissure made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the cover of the knife that you cut through, there are more cartilages that enter when you process them, and in the most white-fleshed parts, they are processed by fissures according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract those that are wrapped in the limbs and feet that you have dissected between the thighs, turning them around the parts that are disarticulated and revolving between the right and left hands, until it is discharged.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And keep in mind that you do not adjust in the fissure for that which does not reach the hilt and is carried away by that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If no opening is seen at the beginning of the fissure, then you should adjust the fissure with a small easement that enters when the process is completed; and remove the one that has been said; and submerge the drapes in water and see if they agree and pause over the place and stretch out those am polvils.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so it is that they cut the sal and pause it in the cavity of the fissure because that this is what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that within when it is healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If you happen to encounter cauterization post-amputation, then care for that with the plastering of cedar within when it is healthy.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of hands of the palms of the foot.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the foot there are nails made by adjusting the natural and ancient ones, then you should make ways for those who are in the foot and make them like methods of maladies as constant tears and softening of the eyelid and skin within when it is caused by tactinir of the foot, and cure it in four hands: either by cauterization at fire; or by medicine acute as it is said in the capitol of cauterization; or by making atactini by inscizio and sutura; or by cannas as you direct.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	When you have covered the patient's genitals with a cloth; convert the eyelid of the other eye to the left, and if it is converted, then so be it; and if not, insert an awl in that place where the pus of the wound is located beyond the eyelid, and let the awl penetrate into the flesh, and then it will be - a part of the eyelid where the eyebrows are, a part of the eyebrows, and pull out the flesh from the parts where the eyelids are, and convert it to the shape of the awl.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And if a pimple appears in the corner of the eyelid where the lashes are, and the spatula of the lacrimal major enters the lacrimal gland; and then extract the awl and close the eyelid with small hairs or with a drap, and place it over the eyelid to be pressed, and it will be as if it were a figurine of a pin.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important that the figure be according to the amount of eyelid elevation, for then it has already been diversified among men, and out of those, the ones that indicate that it should be inscribed on the eyelid in a great quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	When the sweat is on the lines of the eyes that you have described, and it begins to flow from the larger tear duct into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your fissure is close to the natural piles as it is the largest part of the king's body.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the nail in one of the two angles of the codpiece, and remove the entire nail, and adjust it as follows: tighten the thread around the upper lip of the mouth or lower lip, and remove the stitch, and make it adhere if it is not necessary to remove the stitches over two seams for some causes inviscants, if you want to do this, and otherwise, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And follow the sutures of the lips for three or four days, and treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, follow the scarification of your sutures, and treat it as follows: let it dry and constrict, and close the eyelid if the eyelid is swollen, and then remove the plague sigil and its addition; better, fewer suturing is and so less time to tax.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, it is more about the thigh, and it is good for the operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method for taxation, and you see that the eyelid is like a dead fish, and then raise the eyelid by three segregated and gathered segs according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do so, tie the knots, and do not let them slip, then take a ring and put it in the hole that has been made, and insert the other thread into the groove of the figure, and enter the other thread into the larger lacrimal, and the second thread into the smaller one, and adjust the threads to be equal, and raise the tailor's needle to the height that they have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the edges of the wound with the plague, and care for that which is healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you accidentally cut yourself, you need to stop the bleeding or close the wound, sew that cut with care and the similar one, and close it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some wounds appear on the eyelid that their eyes have been converted, then know that you use in that place what they have said about the incision; less surgery is needed for the eyes than for other parts.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Cutting the canes is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And if you convert the eyelid and cut the figure according to what I have said; and by art, make canes or subtle astelas of the same length as the eyelid and width as the latitude of the eyelid and height as the latitude of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	When you have already pierced the ends of each part, you will find the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Add a little subtlety to the gout that is superfluous on the eyelid of the foot, and tighten the canals of each part with a strong stricture, and leave it there for several days, so that the coda within the stricture dies and becomes empty and does not leak inside because if you insert anything wet, it will leak.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If you are late, cut the gout with the pliers, and take care of the wound inside as soon as it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not pull.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to cut these threads that you will make following this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	 and the quantity of the length and width nor more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Regarding the raising of the hairy eyelid in the foot, it swells when the hair is thick.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the eyelids are not natural, hard and rough and sharp-pointed, you perform the operation on them as if you were holding a thin needle and placing it in a fine cut of leather, and as soon as you adjust the ends of the eye and the teeth in your hand, do not use a too fine needle.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	If the length of the fingers is that of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And if you want to add another thin finger further on, and clean the ends of that one, please.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And place the bad foot closest to you, and it is better for the soul because your work is declared, four is a subtle and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And insert the needle into the eye of the adjusted one that needs to be tightened, and make it penetrate deeply into the eyelid forcefully until it exits that part of the natural pelvis.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And pull the pelvis inside and insert it into the joint, and there should be one or two or three, not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And pull your hand out that the pelvis is outside and not in the eyelid, but in the natural pelvis.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If you are not pulling the eyelid and the pelvis is not outside, pull the eyelid to the parts further on that you have composed with the finger that you have used for the suture, until it is outside the sutured part of the wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	When you see that the wound is clean and the edges are well-defined, and then close it with sutures, and leave it for two or three days, until it sticks to its proper place and covers the good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the wound is not too deep, you can adjust a long natural hair to cover it, and raise it over that, or let it enter so that it is well-stretched in that space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of eye puffiness that appears in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When eye swelling appears in the eyelid, and there is contraction of the eyelid when it is pressed on, either to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of plague or wound or cauterization, and this is called ecchymosis, and it can be natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of plague or wounds or cauterization, or for the appearance of them.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The handle of the operation on it is that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips, and leave it in it as soon as it comes between those two machines of cloth, and tie them when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	It is not necessary to use the cure of the patient from the causes that dry them out, because if you do, it will return to exudation of pus that does not have a fever for any time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in those causes that soften the skin as it is in fever, and moisten it with water in which are added olive oil and semen of li, or enguencia, the which is liquefied in some part of the oils, and submerge that meca in it, and cure it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the store of your cure is that you pierce all the engen that is not solidized according to the form that the fire has at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which they have said is only a correction of cautery that does not return the form of the place according to what the fire has given at the beginning.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 124.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of cauterization which is done on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This cauterization which is done on the eyelid, which is called verdaderamente cauterization; and it is either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	When an accident happens due to a plague or a cut or by cauterization or other similar means, it is necessary to know how to treat it properly.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation is to take a double helix and insert it into the tissue, and then place it in the mesentery, and then pass the threads through the lacrimal of the left side into the lacrimal of the right, and then let that thread penetrate into the extremities of the tissue.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the tissue to the parts where the helix is and cut it with the helix and insert it into the wound.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if you return the shape of the eyelid to its former state, so be it; otherwise, take the razor and place it on the edge of the figure, and convert the eyelid, and then close the doors of the eyelid's furrow.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two fissures of the incision are, which you have made, and it is the angle that is made when they come together, and that angle is made when the figure of them comes together.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove the skin of that part according to the amount of inflammation left in the gout, so that it closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and tie them with thread; and cure those that have been told of the mollifying medicines and of the poultices that are inside to make it healthy again.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If you apply the cautery through a fissure or suture, make sure that you press on a flat cut on the eyelid according to what is previously mentioned.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And separate the poultice between the two lips according to what has been said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the speech of the cure of the cauterization when it is removed or left, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared by the form of cauterization, and that is in the form of various motions.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artificer saves all times to prepare engine in every hand that is possible to enter that can return the figure to its natural form or part of that, and that mask according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the larger dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	The text you provided is in Latin, not a language similar to
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	The translation of "De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea" is: "Regarding the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	The translation of "Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci" is: "When this consolidation occurs in men who have solidified the eyelid to the albumin of the eye, and have prohibited the ease of movement and their natural works, then it is necessary that you remove the extrusion of the ray from the eyelid, and lift it upwards, or extend it upwards.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	The translation of "E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat" is: "And if you insert the adhesion of the serum to a subtle surface, which is not sharp like the edges of the incisions, having blunt a small one so that the wound does not cause the operation to be anxious, and keep the serum that does not disturb the eye with its acuteness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	If your incision is causing difficulty in returning the eyelid to its natural form and the adhesion has been completely cured, then it is not necessary to perform a second operation.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And if you put in the water salt that you wash with; or distill it in the sun and dissolve it in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And separate the eyelid from the water and place it on the wool that is in the albumin, and use the third day for consolidating causes until they are completely healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of the eye and importance of the cartilage of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that the eye is made up of two layers, one being nervous and resembling a dry substance, the other being non-nervous and resembling a white, wet substance. When this substance is hit or touched, it separates and the finger does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And the special substances do not eat unless they are taken from the larger tear duct, which gradually covers the eye and prohibits the light and movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	When the worker's hand is in the process of carving the intestine of the patient, it is necessary to pause and work on the edges of the intestine, and lift the eyelid over the patient's eye, and then close the wound with a few sutures and extend it to the surrounding areas.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And take a needle and enter it into the same hole or into the hoof, tail, or nail, or into the nail of a horse, and make the needle enter the nail, and pull out the nail; and extend that to the surrounding areas, and clean the wound with the edge of the nail which pierced the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And do you follow that to the end of the nail into the flesh.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And you insert the stitch in the corner of the lacrimal bone, subtle or small forceps, and open the flesh of the lacrimal bone naturally so that it does not cause continuous flow of continuous lumps.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some people say that the wound is healed when it is extended or closed, and it is said that this is the form of this disease:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	When guarding the eye from the fumes, do not touch the corneal membrane and ensure that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Apply the incision in the wound with a small amount of salt or a point of iodine, and let it enter on another day; and care for that as soon as it is healthy.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the needle does not cause nervousness and you cannot insert it or it is not in that place, then this type of needle is cured by medicine, and it is healed as you advise in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to open that, then open the wound of the thigh and take out the fume with a sharp, pointed needle according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that the wound is roughened and confined and goes into the surrounding tissue, then distill from your own blood in the wound of the point of iodine or am cief rog or am sal trissat, and fill the hole on another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And if you apply it over that operation, which is all that can be done for him, unless he has a contrary aposteme in the heel, then you will see that aposteme enter there, and treat it at the beginning as it is cured.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And apply your operation over that part as soon as it is cured.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the rheum of the tear duct is noticed in the heel for great pain, it should be suspended on an occiput; and incise a part of that one, and do not finish the incision per so that no fluids of lags come out.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And if you distill in the tear duct roof and make a sinus there as soon as it is cured.
Capitol .xvii.	Capstone.xvi.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incision of alguazardenic and of that which is born from flesh adjusted in the heel.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some gallbladders are born in the heels of certain people, and are covered over when they cover the pupil, or are placed on the eyelids or press them heavily against the eyelids and assemble them at the edge of the brow ridge.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	When the operation begins, the patient must lie down; and then open the wound of that part and collect all the flesh that is convenient for this purpose, and either use a forceps or a pair of tweezers; and then incise the flesh at the beginning where everything is finished within the incision, and hold back the flesh that you do not want to damage during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And is your incision at the place where you cut those or at the place where they recommended in the incision of the umbilicus, or at the small forfices that are collected according to the form of this case.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When the wound is completed and all the flesh is filled, then fill the hole with salt thread, or pour in some of this powder resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place it over the cleaned hole of the abscess within which you are sure to avoid gangrene.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if you find any cause of gangrene and the cautery is removed, and you fear gangrene, then clean the hole and cure that gangrene which yields to that gangrene, and repeat it over that in the operation until it is cured, and seemingly make adjustments in the flesh that accumulates in the hole of this speciality.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	May I suggest that you focus on the first source sentence to translate:
Capitol .xviii.	The given text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Decollection of the hazelnut from the hazel tree.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Thus, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the pain is in the quality that is hard or in another part of the body, and if so, you should collect that pain.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And is it that you command the thigh to raise the leg above the knee, and suspend those veins with an onion or a second one according to your prudence; and that onion of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or if you have two onions, they should be placed gradually in one according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And if you bind those veins that are somewhat subtle, somewhat subtle, and remove the sac at the appropriate time, when you see those veins being relieved of pain and being refreshed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And keep in mind that you do not relieve the pain with the joints at the extremities of the limb; and if your operation is completed, and there are no other veins entered, then keep in your operation those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, you should distill in the joint of the highest part or roast for that the acuity of the pain may decrease that is relieved of pain.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If this is not possible for you to completely close it all at that time, and you must apply something to alleviate the pain of the patient, and leave it for several days until the pain is completely relieved and the risk of infection is eliminated.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And continue over the second that the patient's hand is completely healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing hernias to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with cauterization or acute medicine that follows the narration of the pain and is not cured, do not engage in it but rather cover the wound with the maturity of the pain, and extract all the moisture that is in it and let it enter when the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is discovered and sometimes in corruption or blackening, you should apply it as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	 And it is called sharp edge, and it is made of hard wood, and it is used to cut, and it is the edge redone as if it were cut by a point of lima or aliskalfati by a fine puncture (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And pause that over the corrupted location of the bone, and then rotate it between the fingers, and press your thumb gently inside as you know that this composition is damp.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And if it is some wounds, and then restore the place with causes of dehydration and tonicity.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the place is consolidated and good flesh appears in its wound and the body of the disease and roast for 40 days, and it is not renewed or not healed and no accident happens in it, then you know that it is cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	However, you should not be in that engagement but reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and then follow this method: and it is that you discover from second time with iron or medicine sharp, and when you discover the bone, you press a tribune in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	And the extraction of the triangular iron, and it is the one that is first relaxed inside the extremity as many times as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then pause that over the bone, and that is the one of the lacrimal; and along your thumb with a little of wax, and then rotate your thumb as it penetrates all the bone, and it feels the pain because it is dried by the wind when you are in that position.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you restore the place of the medical substances that dry out and as you have seen.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and skin are enduring pain, you return the matter that has spread to the parts around the thigh to its original place, therefore it is placed on the thigh.
Capitol .xx.	Capital.xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reducing the prominence of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel is prominent in its entirety and does not occur in the slightest harm or decrease, you cover the thigh with a cloth, and place it as close as possible, and place the scarification on the neck, and apply the liniment on the heel which is made of acatra, aloe, ense and sarcocolla, and strengthen the dressing on the heel with powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the handling of the powders is that you take strips from the leopard's hooves, and each strip is doubled into four parts; and make from those.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those on top of each other according to the amount that the heel requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And press firmly on those hard parts of the body with the strictest restraint; and repeat the warm winds on his scrubbing; and take away the warm and stretch the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If the ligament is softened, then you must make it straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And take away the ligament as we have said at day and night.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the string has already been reduced, then so be it, and otherwise, repeat the plaster on the powders and the stricture and the warm winds until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the engraving of the eyeball membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the eyeball membrane, and it becomes prominent and protrudes outside the eyelids as a small angle, and its shape is distorted, and you wish to engrave it, then perform the operation as they have recommended, that you enter the needle at the edge of the eyeball from the side where it was previously, and place another needle in the double part of the lacrimal, and make it penetrate and let the first needle follow its position; and engrave the location of the double needle and lift that part of the eyeball into the circuit of the needle, and press that part.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	When the hip bone is extracted and placed on the smooth skin, infused with alcohol in an albumen of gout, it is said to be inserted when the thread of the vine falls into the wound.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And cure the hip bone with this that it comforts the inside when the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some veins are found on the whole part of the hip bone that is within the circle of the drap around the hip bone, and it has a perforation in the subtle spatium that comes to the preon of the hip bone, and runs through the subcutaneous tissue, and descends the hip bone and enters so much.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And stretch it when it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called gout is not simply a disease but rather a swelling that is adjusted in the hip bone, resembling water of descent and not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The most important thing in the work on this is that you put the hip bone on the naked bed and cover it with a cloth, and hold the head so that you see the swelling coming to the parts that were before, and it should be dry and not descend, and leave the lum and the gout would see the causes as they were.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not come down below, you know that it is poisoned.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If it is not prepared for the descent to the sac, as they have said, you should place the intestine between your own thighs and press firmly with a thumb of subtle pressure, and then aim for the continuity of the conjunctiva over the cornea in the cornea (entering at the location where it was), entering if the sac is missing.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, if the sac is missing, you should distill the water in the tail that you have mixed with gall and honey in which you have already built fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And it is appropriate to treat this disease among the other causes, if it is cured.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the poisoned water from the tail.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	As they have said, the specifics of the poison in the division and which convenes to declare that statement, you should follow that with your health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You should make sure that you place the intestine between your own thighs on a cushion and the tail of the honey, the strong one.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then pause a little from the eyelid of the eye that is the one you are looking at, if the one that is the sick one is the one you are looking at; or from the other one, if it is the left one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then hold the other hand on the eye that is the one you are looking at, if the one that is the sick one is the one you are looking at; or from the other one, if it is the left one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then pause the end of the hand that is closest to the crown by the largest part of the rays in the album of the eye's corner of the lacrimal bone, and then bring your hand away from it and turn it towards you and towards him.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then enter the album of the eye and feel that the hand has already been permeated by the cause of the view.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And see that the measurement of the hand's grip is the same as the size of the space inside the black part of the pupil, and it is the crown of the eye; then you will see that the pupil is in the view of the eye because of the clarity of the corneal layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	When you arrive at the place where the poison is located, and when you have removed the upper part of it, and if the poison descends, then you should cover the wound with a cloth and apply it to the place where the victim's sight has been hurt most, and keep it there until it heals.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	If you need to replace it with another one; then if the poison descends, you should replace that other cloth so that it does not stick to it.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	When it is healed and does not descend, you should remove it with ease, and replace it with a new one, and wash your hands frequently, and dissolve a little clear salt of gemma in the poison and wash the wound; and keep the cloth moist or soft or infused in rose oil and albuminous jelly, and apply it to the healed wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Our times are those who have paused over that which has been eaten of our time, albuminous jelly.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey me in covering the wound with the dressing for its hardness — which is one of the reasons why men's hands are hard — then I advise you to take the squeezed dressing that is called alberid of the quality of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	When you have pierced that joint, and do not last your hand in the wound, and do not if not that you make a thread to the hidden place underneath.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	When you have entered the second chamber as they have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must prepare the complement of your work, which is a bed for sleeping with pain relief, where the patient lies on their back in complete darkness, and is completely still.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the gout so that it is lined with its own nature, and does not cause the head to turn or to the left of all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And the limb should be the second day after its disposition.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And it should depart from that in that darkness and expose the visible sound, and see if there are any causes, and return the limb on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it should not be done at the time of the curers or too much before the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It is necessary that you take this by your own hand so that the water falls gently, rather than in great and violent regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess occurs, it is necessary that you remove the splint on the seventh day, and correct that part of the gout that causes the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you look at the patient and place your hand on their face, covering the mouth that controls the movement of their limbs for a certain number of days, it exists in the most dark area.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And his joints began to ache gradually and speak in his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	You know that in alchemy, no disciple of vision is exempt from some visions, and you should be attentive to the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already come to us from alchemy of those who are the art of Artach, and he said that a fire is made in the Ayrac magdaam by piercing the one that succeeds the water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But mays perhaps you have not seen in our land the one who has perfected gout, nor has gout been written in any of the free books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of Ayrac magdaam that are over those, which do not know those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are pains of iron or of copper really, and their extractions from them in this subtle triangle are the sharp extremity as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the care of the flesh nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When the nose has multiple hard nodules of which one causes pain in the heel, or in the polyp of the toe; and this affliction is called polyp, resembling the toe represented by that pain.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if the other is cancerous flesh, dark in color; and if the other is not of a dark color like that of the lion.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Then in that which is not cancerous flesh, but false or lion-like, make sure the abdomen is between your hands and placed on the sun, and touch the nails of the toe, and pick the tip of those nodules.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And if you extract that from the affected parts, and cut it off at that which you understand to be the hard part of one part, knowing that all the flesh is already out; then if the cause allows for an abscess, take this off with a subtle instrument from one of the subtle instruments for ease in reaching that part.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lordship does not sanction or cause an abscess, then stop there with that; or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that within which is sacred and all the cavities are opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	When the patient's nose is sore or swollen, it is customarily called a cold by doctors.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is cleaned and moisture is introduced into the palate, you will know that it has been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate further than the cove, you will know that there is nothing in the pus-filled bones of the nose that has not been perforated by the probe.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, if you find any obstruction in the part where there is a grossness, clean it with water, and stop every so often to measure the amount of the dit or message, and engage the thighs and enter one end of the fiel into the nose through the ear or another cause that may be possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And if it has been said that this should be done, that the odorant is introduced into the nose when it penetrates into the canals of the nose, and is placed over the golayro, too many people will see the resemblance to this action and make the children go to school, and it is a cause that makes him do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause the two extremities of the umbilicus, one end that goes over the nose and the other that reaches into the nose, and then tightly suture the cartilage of the nozzle with the skin that is in the umbilicus, and then enter if you know that the cartilage has already entered the navel.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the umbilicus, and pause in the nose with an abstraction of one calf, and then enter for three days or more if the entire skin is red that comes from the cartilage.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cure, pause in the nose with a catheter for some days until it is healthy.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you need more than three days for the cure, use that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument that the facial purgator uses, which is distilled oil and medicines in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	 And make of silver or gold, which is similar to a small umbrella light, as small as it can be, and the metal is similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a catheter closed as a cane, and the catheter of the facial purgator is flat, open; at which you hold it with your hand, as you hold it when you pour oil or water from the seeds or from the causes suctiblas.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This appears to be a recipe for making remedies using various ingredients. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Capitol .xxv.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	I'm sorry for the interruption, but it seems like there's a mistake in the text you've provided. The phrase "De theyls n
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	I apologize for the confusion earlier. Here's a possible translation of the corrected text:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	To ensure that you are well-informed regarding the beginning of the appearance of the patient, and to attend to all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then pause over the location or use cauterization or the medicine that was in place for the patient.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is made late, and it is magnificent, consider if it is being laparoscopically, hard, of black color, and with few sensations, do not touch that with your iron; four motions are shown to that which you have inserted this apostema by the great malice over that which that had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the apostema is of lion touch and not of black color, and sometimes the incision is possible throughout that, you consider evacuating the thigh and incising that sensitive part, and curing the place as it is now that exits and comes in when it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Regarding the suture of the nose and lips and the ear when the continuity is dissolved by pus or seemingly.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that when the solution of continuity is found in one of these cartilages, few confidence is given in that operation except in other people's homes.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Thus, when caused by any of those causes that you consider to be due to fresh cold humors, and you adjust the edges of the plague with sutures, take care within that it is cured when it is healthy again.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of separation of continuity are already separated, and each is healthy, then you should cover each part of its hidden code with your hand as soon as it starts to bleed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if you adjust the lips of the wound with suture and strengthen those, and over them powder sanctifying dragon's blood and incense that has been cut, and place a powdered consolidating plaster on it, or another of the consolidated plasters, and press it with your finger or thumb for two or three seconds, and then remove that and exchange the plaster and press it within those parts where they are separated, and care for it if it becomes healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The most important thing is that you add the solution of continuity or as needles have been recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity as you and make sure.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitulum 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of extracting those causes that come in the lips of the teeth in the parts of the tongue.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	When swelling is seen in the joints of some men in the parts of their fingers and toes, which resemble hard nails, and some are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Thus, if you convert the lips and nails of each of those hard parts, and then fill the wound with cleanliness all around that which is tightened, and then wash it with water as much as possible and treat the wound with what is antiseptic, inside that which is sore.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care should be taken to cut the gums that are adjusted with the white thread, and then you should hang that on or have it hanging from your hand, and place it in its position, and let the pus run or the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then pause over the tightened part or another sterile or exfoliating powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, make an incision secondarily and cauterize it, and make sure the cauterization does not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason for tooth pain.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the parts of the teeth and between the gums that are adjusted with hard, rough, and some veins are black and are white or yellow within which the gum is corrupted and are the teeth that are loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so, you should cover the patient's genitals with a cloth and place their head on the pillow at the head of the bed, and remove the teeth from those that appear to be loose and cause a similar effect if they do not have any other cause, and then use blackthorn and citrus and other things that are used for this purpose.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you do not want to use this remedy at the beginning of the disease, then so be it; but if you do, apply it over those areas on other days and days and nights until you come to the end of the statement in which you wish to use it.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the teeth have needed various cuts of different shapes and figures, which are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And for this reason, the razors are different for each tooth that is cut from the part of the teeth, and these forms of razors are prepared by you in such a way that they can be used for all of them.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you treat the tooth of your patient's pain with all your skill and effort, and eventually completely eliminate it, it is not due to any cause that satisfies the vein of the patient when it is eliminated, but rather there is a substance within that causes an exclusion in the elimination of the patient.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient's tooth is being treated to eliminate the pain, you must be certain that the painful tooth is the one that is causing the pain to come out of the gum and that it is a healthy tooth, and you will eliminate that and then the pain does not cease until the painful and damaged tooth is eliminated, as we have seen in hair removal operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So how do you need to certify that the painful tooth is the one that is causing the pain to come out of the gum, and that you know if, when it is dissolved in the circuit of the tooth, if there is any virtue in it, as long as it is dissolved from the gingiva of the whole part, and then make sure that those words are true or that they are subtle at the beginning, little by little, until it comes together.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	When cutting or making an incision on the thighs for good communication or to relieve pressure, and then pull the testicle back between the legs that you hold in your hand, and then try to squeeze the second one in a straight line in the other hand that does not touch it, nor causes more pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if you do not forget, take one of those instruments, and place it at the end of that side with ease and effort to remove the stitch that was made at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is swollen or inflamed, you should cover that part with a cloth and gently pull on it towards the end of the thin thread so that it does not get twisted during your constraint over that tooth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And work carefully on the scarification in the circuit of the entire gum and keep your strength so that you do not touch it and cause more pain, and return to the patient's thigh for the greater pain of the first one.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to make that which those barbers who perform their services and have courage in the eradication of them do, since they do not administer what has been recommended; four marks come to bring over the large-bodied men who are difficult to manage and are not twisted, and all the pleasure of their bodies, or some of those, or that you extract from that tooth of the mandible as witnesses have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	When the eradication of the disease is washed with vinegar or salt in the mouth,
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is any flow of blood from the wound, do as follows: take some amount of thyme and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not stop the flow, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and their tips should be subtle, as those that cause difficulty in extracting the tooth at the beginning are long extramuscular, narrow grip, so they do not bend when applied to those that need to be operated on.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if they are used as follows: when the grip is large, it is not bent, it is thin extramuscular.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they have points of Indian iron that are thin extramuscular, and in the extramuscular of those there are teeth of the kind that some of them are inserted into others and are stretched with a strong contraction, and some of the extramuscular of those are the form of the beak of an axe which has been named cicada, it is thin, and they have great contraction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxi. (This appears to be a reference to a
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	This sentence seems to be discussing the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the trapezius muscle. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate the tooth that is causing pain, which is Roman in nature and has a cause, you should stop over the location where it borders for a day or two, and then enter with your hands or hold the extramits of those which are assembled at the beak of an animal called ciconia or guanta, in the form of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extramits of these teeth are made of gold or silver.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey my instructions and apply these forceps or tenacles, you should stop over the incision and remove all the flesh and enter the instrument that has been called this, which is a small lever of this form.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it has a thick end and is not closed with something else that is closed.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the incision is forgotten, it is; and otherwise, help me with these other instruments of which these are forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extramit in which there is any thick one.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a smooth subtle end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	When you have already helped with this instrument and it has two prongs, as in the following example:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	This sentence is about using other instruments that are necessary for shaving teeth. The first part "e am autres instrumentz" can be translated as "and other instruments". The second part "les quals precidero en rasura de dentz" means "that are needed for shaving teeth". The third part "quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma" can be translated as
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	This sentence is about using a triangular-shaped tool to cut the tip of a tooth that is not broken or decayed. The first part "de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta" means "of the triangular-shaped tip". The second part "la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	This sentence is about knowing which tools are used for teeth and how they resemble other instruments. The first part "E" means "And". The second part "otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantament les autres
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	This sentence is about the skill of artisans and their subtlety in craftsmanship. The first part "Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art" means "More the skilled and subtle artisans". The second part "atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas" can be translated as "and they fail because they do not understand or use the appropriate instrument for the different diseases; those are of the different diseases that the ancients did not know or use any specific tool". The third part "quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the mandible or any other bone in the mouth is broken or fractured, then one should apply cold pressure over that area in its proper place as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	When there is any slight swelling in the throat, and it is held or tied in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak out, and the whole bone becomes forgotten; then return the location to the appropriate medical treatment for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small crack in the bone, note that part and its size, and treat it within that bone when it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol, Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth do not follow the natural course of the body in that form, and especially when it is in women, and even more so in virgins; therefore, I advise you to consider: if the tooth is nothing else but another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or apply a linament to it, then cut into that one; rather than it being annexed to another tooth, insert this instrument of which this is the form; and it seems like the neck of a pig, and it is made of Indian iron of sharp extrinsic quality.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If a tooth is significantly exposed to cold, then apply this type of iron from India, which is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	It is entirely made of Indian iron and is wrapped in a cloth; and it is made with as many points as there are joints, with which the tooth is slightly pressed every few days until another tooth does not ache and bleed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line it up in that place, and pull it out with those razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If a tooth has a part that is sharp and bites the tongue, then you must cut that inside so that the edge of that piece is not left exposed and not consumed, and it is sealed so that the tongue does not descend and the word does not corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of damaged teeth, use gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth in front are damaged by concussion and displacement due to percussion or hammering, and the mouth cannot hold it with that hand, and you have treated it with medicinal stitches, but your treatment did not work, then do as follows: cut those that are strong with gold and not with silver, and if silver is used, make it green and apply it to the same days, but if no gold is used, it will not change.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	When the joint is in such a subtle and gross manner that it fits between the teeth; and the form of the receipt is that you hold the joint and hold double of it between two healthy teeth, and approximately as much as the bend of thejoint between the teeth that are not healthy, or one or more, enter when the fabric enters the tooth of the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the injection into the part of where you started, and hold firmly with your hand but with ease and know that it is not painful.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And if your grip is tight on the joint, you must hold the teeth that do not escape with your hand.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut the excess of the joint with forceps or pliers, and add those to any place where you can use them, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the unhealthy tooth, so that you do not cause damage to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then hold that tight as a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it slips or breaks, hold that or those with another joint in the same manner for the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of teeth and the figure of healthy teeth and rotten ones, as well as how many times these are:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When one returns a tooth or toothroot to its proper position in the gums and they regrow as they should, and remain strong.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	This means "Only an artist and a craftsman can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	This means: "Some bones are suitable for the purpose of cattle, and they are made to look like teeth, and are placed in their proper location where the tooth deficiency is, and they become strong as they should, and remain so for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	This is a Roman numeral that corresponds to the number 344 in
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	This means: "Of the sign of the language that is forbidden in speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This means: "This language that we see some bones or natural to the mouth of a certain man, or accidental and accidental due to plague that has already been established.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	This means: "And the operation on it is to close the mouth of the thigh, and if there exists in the upper part; and raise the tongue, and insert that sign according to the nerve following the latitude where the tongue has been released from its recent position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or denotation in that part, and this is for the consolidation of the plague, then you should cut and divide that according to its latitude within which the liment is inscribed and the denotation is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	But be sure that there is no true fissure in the skin of the flesh and that you divide here arch and come out with fluid from the sinus.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And if you wash the edges of the inscription with water or with vinegar or with watered down soap; and then place your tongue on the salve; this is what holds the thigh in place, so that it is not consolidated by another view.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If you see fluid from the sinus, place over the cut place; and if the sinus bleeds, then cauterize the place with a pointed cautery as much as necessary to stop the bleeding.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And this cure is for the other causes within which it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	From the extraction of the gall bladder, place the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	When some tongues swell up and are twisted, resembling the name of a small prohibition that prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and very much it is magnified when it is pushed into the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in him is that it pushes the mouth of the patient forward towards the sole and considers the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see the tongue of dark color or black, hard, to which the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch that one which is crooked.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is leaning towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, you should put the onion on it, and insert a small amount of ointment underneath, and insert the whole part; and if it happens during your operation, you should pause for a moment, it is vetriol, when it is restricted by the ointment.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And return to your work when you have washed it with praise of the ointment, when it is rinsed with water and salt; and care for that which is cured in another treatment when it is healthy.
Capitol .xxxvi.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	This sentence seems to be in a medieval or ancient language, possibly Latin, and it translates to: "Extract of the gout of doe's ears and of that which is nothing in the groin, and of the other gouts.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the time comes to remove the gallstone, it is glands that are assembled together like cotton, which become deformed and are named "ears of gold," which when you treat them according to what has been said in division and they do not heal, then you should consider if the aspirate is hard, of a dark color, with few sensations, and if you do not touch that one with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If it is of a red color and the head is large, do not touch that one with iron for the sake of the wound; rather, let that go inside its mature age, and either you or I will treat it later.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of a white color and the head is watery, and the tip of that one is subtle, then you should treat it as if it were infected.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation on it is what you consider, depending on your operation, whether the aspirate of that one has been completely removed or if it has decreased due to some decrease; and you should sew the wound downwards, and the head of it should be in the upper part, and close the mouth of it, and the server should take between their fingers the tongue of it, and the instrument that is of a noble form for this is the following:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	The first line translates to "It is necessary to make a point with silver or gold, and it should be subtle like thread." This line suggests that the use of silver or gold for making points ( likely in acupuncture or similar
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	The text translates to: "Then, as you prepare the language and show it to me, and place your hand over that part, grasp it and fix it in place, and pull it out in the direction of the parts that can be moved." This line seems to provide instructions for an action related to the previous context, possibly a medical procedure or treatment.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	The text translates to: "Another cause that you pull out of the membranes, and proceed with that hand instrument of which this is the form:" This line suggests that there is another action or procedure involved, possibly related to the previous context. The use of "another" and "hand instrument" implies that this is a separate step or tool used in the process.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	The text translates to: "And it is assembled like forceps, but the extramits are curved, so that the orifice of any of those is at the end of the other, with sharp ones, which is of iron inlaid with silver." This line seems to describe a specific tool or instrument used in the process, possibly a pair of forceps with curved tips and sharp edges made of iron with a silver coating.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	The text translates to: "If this instrument is not at your disposal, you should insert that hand instrument of the same form as the other, and if one part is sharp, the other part must be blunt." This line provides instructions for using a different tool or instrument if the initial one is not available. The use of "sharp" and "blunt" suggests that there may be a need to balance or complement the sharp edges with blunt surfaces for safety or effectiveness.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	You have already inserted a wax, insert the other end of this hand-held tool in the same way, and the intestine will be cleaned by water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is no flow of blood, cleanse the wound with water from milk or from the tail of a rat and similar substances as soon as the flow of blood is stopped, and treat it accordingly.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some veins may be found in the groin or other parts of the body, and insert them after you have said what you said in the waxing of honey threads.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you had already treated a woman with an hematoma that was in the groin of her body, which hematoma was black in color, of little sensation, which had closed the groin of her body, and the woman breathed deeply, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking, and it had become near death if no one had died in two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the hematoma had already grown so much that there were two ramps inside it when it was pressed with two fingers.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Thus, you must cut and remain in one of the holes, and draw it out, and tear off that part, and then insert the other end into the large piece, and accordingly press the corner of the other wound, and then bite on the tongue, and swallow the saliva, and keep the leg in that position.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And if you cut off a large piece of it, and did not run it for a short time, only a few drops of blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus, absolutely is the gullet of that woman, and began to drink so much water, and accordingly press the wound, therefore you did not stop inserting into that wound for a long time, and this wound in place of that, which was inserted inside when prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Thus, you must make it warm and cauterize the gullet of him, therefore this addition; and then walk around and do not wash what God made of that prop mi.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitulare. xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the insertion of a woman when she is castrated.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the throat, and it is long and narrow, then it is called a "catarrhal sore" (or "catarrhal ulcer"). And if it is in the part that is heavy and round, and it is called a "bubon".
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the wound is healed and they say that it was cauterized, but it does not give you relief, and sometimes it seems that the cauterization has already been removed from the body and is subtle, then it is likely that the intestine has been sewn in that which has been added round; and if it is at that length, and it bleeds, of a dark color or black, and not to the center, then you should tighten the stitching in that area, as there is fear of the thigh.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that the second hand is following the first one that you have told about its whiteness and length, that you are sewing the thigh and pressing the tongue of the other instrument by which you process its form and put it in place, and take that down and sew it with one of two instruments that you say has an inscission of two mells.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	When the wound is not closed except for this remedy that is applied over the natural end of the part added, if you do not close it with this, you will have to speak again.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	When approaching the incision, use the one that has been recommended in the incision of two millstones, and care for that which is within that which is healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the thigh was affected by the incision of the foot, then it is certain that you use an edge in the cauterization of the foot, and the tip of the cauterization instrument in the foot is not but sharp cold, and it is that you hold the head of the thigh in the upper part, and press the tongue of the tool with which they have said, and press with the cold that has been said in the capitol of cauterization, and comforts am aquela cause alive, and pause aquela not thin nor subtle, and fill the concavitat of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The exit of the cavity should be in the way that the cavity of a chicken is, and place the instrument of medicine on the vessel, and the thigh should be placed on the side per that which corro saliva or musellage of the mouth of that for the intrinsic medicine, so that not cause of that same cause over the golayro of the and that descends to that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	When you apply the medicine to your throat, it is placed over the area for about an hour, as it is degraded and desensitized by medical bites.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, take the scissors and wrap the medicine around the tip of the finger, and insert the scissors into the medicine, and enter the finger into the canula through that which the finger adheres to the canula, and make as many cuts as you can to achieve the desired cauterization of the grape, and leave it for about three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you are instructed to reapply the medicine, do so again, and remove the cauterization by scraping along the circuit of the grape with the scissors inserted into the finger, and modify that water which is in the circuit of the medicine, and rinse it with fresh water, and treat the wound with antiseptic, and dress it with bandages when it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This special treatment is saved because I inserted it and placed it for a long time out of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	This appears to be a medieval medical text describing various treatments for different conditions. Here's my attempt at translating the first source sentence:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	When the opening is in the mouth of the patient and steam is blown into the throat over the tonsil, and if the tonsil is not obstructed.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And if you pass over those veins that are dry and wet, and keep in mind that this cure is not for the relief of gout, as too many would adjust in the gout, and do not think that you are doing this, but rather you must declare the declaration of the gout of the cauterant.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you are not present with this instrument, take a cane and close the hole of the cauterant in the extraction of the mouth, so that the mouth of the patient is protected, for the closure of the cauterant prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extracting spines and of the gout that adheres to the groin and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Veins that are dry and wet are adhered to the groin or spine of the eyes or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	It is not clear that you extract gout that is apparent, over which the eye looks, because you put your tongue on the instrument coming from there, so that it may be declared to you that it is in the groin.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When the intestine is not seen and is hidden in the abdomen, it is likely that you are vomiting because the food consumed has been rejected by the stomach. Or that the intestine is expelling its contents through the anus, mouth, or nose; or that a sponge from the sea of Leon is taken and placed on it with great force, and then the intestine is expelled through that, as if it were in the location where the intestines are located and are being removed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And perhaps take a fish and drink a large amount of it, and then be excreted; or take a pear and chew it thoroughly and then excrete it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you are not expelling those causes that have been said, then you should use an instrument like this to expel them:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it may be large and thick, and in the expulsion of the small one, the cavity is narrowed that you enter with ease into its abdomen.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	When the patient is elevated on pillows, and you hold their hand to feel for the pulse of the neck, so that it may be felt for what causes the pain in the bones or spine, or what that physician thinks about it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, if the patient's condition is severe, that is, the cause of the pain has reached the bone and caused inflammation, and then remove the instrument from the body as much as possible according to the quantity prepared before it becomes forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extracting the annexed sinew from the groin.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the blood has been medicated as directed by the physician and it does not bring relief, consider the groin of the patient's thigh in the soil, because you have swollen the tongue of the instrument that the physician recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the sinew, extract it gently or with subtle gestures.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if you cannot easily extract it, then insert a concave needle into the groin of the patient and place a lit iron in the concavity of the needle, and make as many punctures (as long as the sinew is still alive and connected to the thigh) and abstain from giving the patient too much water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	If you take a full cup of water and pour it into the mouth of the patient in that way, and cleanse the mouth with it; and do not let any other cause be blamed for the water, but rather take a cup of water after another, until the patient feels as if they have drunk enough water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not forgotten that they have recommended, you should smoke the thigh or the asafetida of the cimetz or asafetida in the smoking of the uvula, which they have recommended in the smoking of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, in another way.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	This is another way of operating in smoking, as you take a flame made of charcoal and place it in a covering on the end of the instrument, and wind the instrument around the end of the canula; and then stop the smoking; and place the thigh in its mouth at the end of the canula, and close the mouth so that the smoking is not forgotten until you know that the smoking has reached the sanctuary, which the sanctuary most often.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If you do not catz, then you should repeat the subfumigation motions, and avoid using the bad on the body, and eat salty and healthy foods and no alcohol, and do not get dehydrated, and this regimen is necessary if it is forgotten outside.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument that is used to treat the gout of the toe when it is seen; and it seems like forceps several times, but there is one curve in it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And the table is placed on the floor, and its extremity resembles the beak of a cicycle, which is picked at with a brush, for so long, when any cause is suspected, that one does not let it.
Capitol .xl.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text "Capit
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	I apologize, but I am unable to provide a translation for the given text as it appears to be incomplete or not in a language that I can recognize. Could you please provide more context or the complete text? I'm here to help with medieval medical treatises and translations
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostelms are special movements, of manual movements, according to what is remembered of them, of each in this free book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second hand is prop to the places where the accidents occur on the body, such as the accident in the head being different from the accident in the buttocks; and the accident in the fleshy part of the body is different from the joint accident; and to each of them their treatment is different.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some accidents are such that they do not appear to be pierced, but rather matured by the sore in those or its complements.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other accidents are such that they are not seen to be pierced when they are crossed, and they are not matured according to their complement, as the accidents that are proper to joints, where the accident is proper to the joint, is prolonged within what can be touched by the circuit of the joint, and it is most corrupted the limbs or nerves of that joint, for it causes contraction of that member; or it is a proper accident of the principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it within its matured rind of the principal member; or it is a proper anus, so perforate not the cru; and it does not cover that which is not undigested, but rather that which is proper to the anus, so that it does not cause the onset of the preen of the anus and elongates the parts of the dents of the anus, and it is a fistula or a fissure in the end of the anus that is not sane.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the time of the incision of the appendix, and it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	If you know that the pain subsides and the fever ceases, and the decrease in the coma and pulse, and the acuity of the appendix head, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know that the incision should be made at the location where the appendix is located and where the discharge comes from the cure of the appendix.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the incision should be made according to the length of the flesh or the chest, if the appendices are in the parts of the greater or lesser toes, and in the location of the ligaments, of the tendons of the nerves, of the arteries; and in all those locations where there is no reflection, use the perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the appendix is in flesh, you should make the incision as soon as the digestion of the second part has been confirmed, as they have said; and if you make the incision at that point, the corset of the poopy pole and the sore lip will be prolonged, and very much the labia of the endured one and the depth of the.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When tumors are caused by cold humors that infiltrate the body's flesh or skin, it is necessary to remove them according to the location of the tumor or the affected part of the body.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you make a small puncture, and in large tumors, make a large puncture with many holes or cuts according to the size of the tumor.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other parts of the tumor where it is necessary to cut and fix it, when it is found that the wound is closed and healed, it is similar to what happens in many boils and abscesses.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not closed by cutting, and of those where the wound is not closed, it is similar to what happens in the case of a tortoise's shell, which is similar to the tumor's flesh.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are treated with round and lunular incisions, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	That which does not have anything similar to the surface tumors of the skin, and if you make a puncture or cut in that place, it is necessary to make a superficial puncture or cut as much as possible.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the abscess becomes large and has already gathered impure pus that pierces it, and you do not touch that part; if one part is extracted, and the abscess is left to open on another day, and a larger piece is extracted, and more pus flows in subsequent stages as it gets worse, then it is best to do this.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	If the patient is of good character, or a female prisoner, or a small child, or an old person, and the animal spirit resolves the abscess at its exit, and the wound is large, then you should operate on it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful with this capillary, and pay attention to the hole you make in the place where you pierce the abscesses, because you will cleanse the wounds of the plague or consider if the plague of the abscess is few, or a flat slice; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the hole are holes, then you should pay attention to what you do in every corner that comes out of it.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess, a part of the rib is separated from the body or has been concave in that area, you should cover it with a piece of cloth or a piece of linen that fits tightly; and keep it moist as you would when you have cuts or scars; and proceed with that and care for the one who covers the abscess that is located in the area that was once sick.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If you happen to have an accident during your operation, you should immediately administer water to cleanse the area and wet the cloth that covers it, and place it over the location of the flow of the unseen sac.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of the sac persists, you should know that you must administer regular and careful care and powder those that I have recommended in the various parts of this free and divided body.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is located in the cold nerves, you should know that you must wrap the powders in oil and place them over the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the areas are rough, you should know that you must place damp powders with water and oil or vinegar on them, and all of this should be done as they have said, and you should open the abscess and clean it and care for the sick part with the care that is appropriate for the sick part to be cured.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	When it comes to the cure of ulcers universally, it is necessary to have knowledge of the cure of each type of ulcer, as I have already said in detail about the cure of each type of ulcer individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the sections of ulcers that occur on the scalp.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the scalp of small ulcers, and of specific nodes that contain tunics which are their fact; and the specifics of their movements.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And if they are pimples, and those that contain moisture like honey.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain moisture like polls, and resembling them; and of those that are hard, rigid.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those that are not feared, as the extraction of those does not contradict the arc.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is what you express them with the instrument that has the form which is best suited, called an enterome, if you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If it is necessary to count the humidity, then cut that piece according to its length by cutting it superficially in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And if you find Egyptian cotton, if it is present, and otherwise in water and salt; and wrap that plague around it and keep it inside for another day, then this will corrode all that is like the coating of that cotton.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And if you examine that Egyptian cotton repeatedly and thoroughly, according to what is suggested by the doctor, when you are confident that there is no plague on that coating; then treat the plague with the cotton if it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if you have a thickened node, then you should insert this form next:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	And if you have a notched form, then it should be made in this way: Place your fingers between the two lips of the cut and the end of that part, and exert your skill in removing the tunic that contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If you have any objections, then I advise you to return to the beginning first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And if it seems that the thickened form of the cut and cure is according to what you have said; and the notched form of the cut is placed on the thickened one, then it is made with few sand and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	When some people have headaches that are caused by cold humors in the heads of men who are not humid; the cause is that one puts their hand on an apostemat in the head of a woman's forehead and hardens the apostemat as if it were a deaf, sharp, white stone, which could not be made soft, and if that person touches it, they will be harmed.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Some accidents occur in the other apostemas of the head, not in this one, as those that come to the caps of children and must be the slices of the aurellians, but all of these are superficial cuts.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the puncture of those who have low parts because it is easier to remove the disease from the low parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And cure those that are necessary for the treatment of that of the curacy.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the cuts of the scrophulas that happen in the colon.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Motions visible in these apostemas in the colon and in the intestines and in the thighs; and some motions happen in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	When those that have occurred in the neck, and those that are generated between them, and all swelling of those is given to its own covering, and it appears as in the nodules and papules of the head, and as they have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The specifics of these warts are motives, where some are made of stones, and others contain moisture, and some are malignant ones that do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	When you see good disposition in the tincture, of which the color of water that is manifested is proper to the color of the skin, and is bad for all parts, and is not annexed to the nerves of the cheek, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not pressed, covering that which is dry superficially of the part from the part of the other side of the line of .G. within the line of .B., and burn that completely, and extend those of the skin from the whole part, and extend the labia of the belly from one, or from both if you need them, as they have said in the apostles of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And more caution is needed to ensure that the vein or nerve is not injured.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And if the spasm is not hot, that it does not fit to you what you inscised, or that calms the thigh, and that inscised water that is not necessary to inscise; then if you inscide the vein or artery and prohibit you of your operation, stop in the grinding glass or other powders that stand fluxes of sanc, and stretch the grinding, and lay it within that which was repaired by the apostle's sharpness and made smooth the grinding and began to be porridged.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the sinus cavity is separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	And then return to your operation once the abscess is filled.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire if there are any other small pustules, so insert those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the large vein of the pustule, cover those who have not inserted that pustle into its position.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Abundantly cover that which is well folded and that falls within its own section to prevent it from falling into its own harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the plague of old hairs that you have already submerged in Egyptian search, and then care for that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you insert the entire pustule, then cover that which adjusts the lips of the plague and cuts as many pustules as possible without causing any excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you see that there is excess waste due to the size of the pustule, then understand the position of its mouth and cut it and dress the wound and as said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the scrotum contains moisture, make a superficial perforation here at the location of the maturation of the testicle, and pause the perforation so that it does not reach the base of the chest, as they have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And if you administer the perforation, use a sharp needle and make it similar to those, so that it does not break through the skin.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the plague has been washed away, then you should care for that sharp needle made of flesh generated within until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 33.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the section of the syringe of the apostematic accident, a gout occurs.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Dissolve the ancient section in the syringe, and do not show anyone in our land that this has happened.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the script of the sermon for those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Many men have not suffered from this, but the extraction of the syringe is avoided because it is not beneficial for anyone to remove all the veins and major arteries of the patient here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	When there are gauzes or sponges in the mouth or ears, and the patient is not in bed, it is necessary to quickly cut off the gauze or sponge to prevent further damage, which is done at the end.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then, when you want to do this, make three or four small incisions around the epigastrium, one at each point where two circles meet, in such a way that the incision is not in the cartilage but in the subcutaneous tissue, and this place is suitable for incision, as it is free of fat and the bones of the stomach are clear.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is afraid, make sure to extend the gallbladder's stalk as much as possible and cut it between where it comes out of the canal, and avoid the gallstones if there are any causes for them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then make the incision according to the recommended method; and it is significant over the incision of the canal for the flap that is of that eye which is of the patient's side and for the disruption and for the abscess of the wound.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	When the wound is open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	If the wound is not healed by the time of the incision, add more pieces of cartilage from the wound, and cover that with it.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And apply medicines that make the flesh healthier as it becomes healthy.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	According to Albucasis, the sum of the speech that has been recommended, exposure is only that you see that the thighs have become thin, and the thighs are about to die, and the flesh is cut off, and they insert the epigastric vein through which the lung breathes over the wound for some breathing, and it is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command that the wound is cleaned up when the madness of the gout has been consumed; and it is the madness of the gout for three days; and then I command that the wound be cleaned in this way, and cared for when it is healthy.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And that you have seen by my hands, is that a vendor has a cell and sews it in the thigh and inserts another part of the lung canal, and you were called for the cure of the wound, and closed it as it is closed in the dead, and discovered the wound and closed the one that was meant to be, and discovered the plagua and closed the one that was meant to be.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Thus you have confessed that that had not infected veins or guides, and the wind was of the plague, and treated that entered which was inflamed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	When there is no need for the service if it does not cause pain in the vote, and approximately on the third day, return to the lordship of your possessions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epilation.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Regarding the section of apostema which occurs in the groin and is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apostema, called hernia of the groin, is a large apostema after the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is second to two menstruations, whether natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural, there is no means of healing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is second to two menstruations, one of which resembles grass nodes, and the other is apostema caused by narrowing of the artery, and in this there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not assumed that this is like iron in that which is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you advise that and investigate it with that which is said, and if it resembles grass nodes and is not suspended in any vein, then you insert it as the nodes are inserted, and extract that part of it which contains the matter of the pelvis and bursa; and otherwise, you examine all the symptoms, and apply cure to the place from which the cure enters if it is safe.
Capitol .xlv.	The text you provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	1. "Capitol .xlv." is not a complete sentence and does not provide enough context to translate accur
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	1. "Dels nodes so motas specias" translates to "Of the nodes' special characteristics.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	When you recommend that there is a difference between node and exitus as per the passage, it means that there is a distinction between the two concepts discussed in the text. However, without the context of the entire text, it is difficult to provide a more specific translation
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	It seems that you are translating a sentence from French to English. The sentence you provided is: "Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	When there is no fever or coldness, and it counts the leopard's paw that is in the abdomen, it means that the patient has appendicitis.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is second the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a sack and is made of thread, whether larger or smaller, and there are two species, four in number, one being fat and containing humor, and the colors of the humor are motes, according to what you have seen in division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When you reach the cure for pain, that expresses this and inquires about it at its beginning, which is called the introme, according to what comes out in the capital, which is nearest to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is man's inquisitive nature and all nodes, and that you take this introme and enter it into the place wetted with humor that touches the apostem, and you will turn the ties saying that little by little you enter as you know that this introme has already penetrated the abdomen.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then the last of your ma and according to the size of the apostem, and extract the introme and consider that it is in the style of the.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the moisture is forgotten, of whatever color, you should cut it with a sharp knife along the line that I mentioned in the other postings.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there is no moisture in the wound, you should know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	Dry over the cut that has this form according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you were taught, and suspend the cut on that, and scrape off the skin of that part as easily as possible, and keep the belly or sack over it and take out that sore from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and you must leave it as it is, and you should extract it as soon as possible before any other cause makes it worse.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If it gets worse due to any cause, a little or a lot, the node will return according to the situation.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you see that the wound is getting worse in any small part, you should make a poultice of some sharp, acute corrosive powders and strengthen the poultice, and place it over the post-operative cauterization cushion, and treat that with another remedy as soon as it becomes healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If it is very large, you must cut off the woman's lips and treat that one as you have been taught.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If there is pulsation in the opposite direction, or no pulsation, you must cut and plug the place where the gallstone has been passed and leave it for two days or three hours until the plague ceases and the fever subsides; and then return to remove the gallstone.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitular Act XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the sterilization necessary in section and piercing.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the infiltrations, and there are three kinds, which are the greatest, the middle, and the smallest.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The first form of infiltration is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The second form of infiltration is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The third form of infiltration is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are the causes of iron, of alum, of the ends of branches that are gently bent, so as to strengthen the intestine in the openings.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	This is the form of the experiences, and they are named after them, and one of those is called breadth.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it has three species, four of which are large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experience that is large, the form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experience that is medium, the form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experience that is small, the form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is necessary for those who are apostemas, exits, and fistulas, and abscesses, for they enter those from the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And these are returned, large, stones, they are like great needles that are inserted into the seals, and they are pains of those that are made of lemons, or of iron, or of silver, and the better ones are when they are made of lemons.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And these are the pains of the black plum, which are similar to those that are opened for the fistulas in the cavity of those that are reflected in their reflections, which are reflected at their levitation and at those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	This sentence is discussing the different types of fistulas and their lengths based on the size of the opening and the stricture (narrowing) of the fistula. Here's a line-by-line translation:
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The first source sentence is not provided in the text you've given. However, I can provide a translation for the last
Forma del experient migier de plom:	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the last line of your text is incomplete. Could you please provide the full sentence or context
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The translation of "Forma del experient petit de plom" would be "The form of the experienced small f
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The translation of "Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias" would be "The forms of the gallstones are of special shapes." The rest of the sentence explains that these shapes can be simple or complex, with three main types: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	The translation of "E de lor so uncis orps" would be "And their uncini are also different." The rest of the sentence explains that these uncini can
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	The translation of "E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas" would be "And those uncini have different curves." The rest of the sentence explains that these curves can be simple or complex, with three main types: large
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	The translation of "E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas" would be "And their uncini have three curves." The rest of the sentence explains that these curves can be simple or complex, with three main
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	The translation of "E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc" would be "And all of this is necessary in their location
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The translation of "Forma de unci simple gran" would be "Shape of a simple large gallstone." The rest
Forma de unci simple migier:	The first line of the text is not in English but in a language that is somewhat similar to Lat
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	This line can be translated as: "Form of a simple cut: This is how it is done for one." In other words, this
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a great wound:" This line suggests that there is a description or explanation of a
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a large cut: This is how it is done for one." This line continues the previous one and provides more context. It seems to
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small cut: This is how it is done for one." This line follows the same pattern as the previous ones, offering more information
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a great wound with two curves:" This line suggests that the wound has a curved shape. It could be a description of the w
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a simple cut with two curves:" This line continues the previous one and provides more context. It seems to suggest that the cut also has a cur
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small cut with two curves:" This line follows the same pattern as the previous ones, offering more information about the shape of the cut. It could be
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a great wound with three curves:" This line suggests that the wound has a more complex shape, with three curves. It could be a description of
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a simple cut with three curves:" This line continues the previous one and provides more context. It seems to suggest that the cut also has a more complex shape, with
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small cut with three curves:" This line follows the same pattern as the previous ones, offering more information about the shape of the cut. It could be a description
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	This are the forms of the knives that are cut and scored on the nodes and ganglions, and there are three kinds, four of which are big, smaller, and fewer.
Forma de scapel gran:	The form of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language that is similar to
Forma de scapel pauc:	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The provided text appears to be written in a language that is not recognizable by my current capabilities. I am unable to translate or interpret it accurately. If you could provide more context or the text in a different format, I would be happy to assist you further.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	The provided text appears to be written in a language that is not recognizable by my current capabilities. I am unable to translate or interpret it accurately. If you could provide more context or the text in a different format, I would be happy to assist you further.
La forma de magda gran:	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I
Forma de magda migier:	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize
Forma de magda pauc:	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	The provided text appears to be written in a language that is not recognizable by my current capabilities. I am unable to translate or interpret it accurately. If you could provide more context or the text in a different format, I would be happy to assist you further.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language that I can recognize or translate accurately. If you could provide more context or the text in a different format, I would be happy to assist you further.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spasms, which are found between the thighs and the perforation of the hamstrings and not the maladies, and there are three species: great, middle, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of vasospasms that are found where the flow of blood is severed, and there are three species: great, middle, and small; the forms of those are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They were made of lemons, round and of a certain length, and they were subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you need to know that these forms of vasospasms are great, middle, and small, because for those severed blood flows need speed, and at your first attempt it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Do not use to abscise blood in all parts of the body, and do not use only in fleshy places, as in the lips of the changes and of the thighs, and in the lips of the breasts, and of the nipples and of the belly and of the ears, and seem like those of the carnous lacertz.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	When certain points are caused by those other instruments that seem to be small similar to needles; which is cut off when made by excision, or you have to incise the vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Certain points are round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the breasts of men which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Certain points are inflated in the breasts of some men, which must be complemented with sleeping while beginning to grow hair, and if the points are inflated, and the breasts are assembled, and Roman apothecary leaves them.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to do this, cut along the line of .B. up to the line of .G., and remove the entire fat, and emplace the medicament carnatum, and adjust the lips of the plague according to what is appropriate, and cure that within which is sound.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the breast declines and is softened by its own magnitude, as in women, it is cut into two parts, and two similar sections are made, resembling the figure of the moon, of which each part is contained within the other, if that which is larger contains the smaller one of this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G., and the excoriation of the tongue that is between two lips of the pus, and the removal of the soreness, and the application of what has been said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure, if it is healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not fulfill the inscription of what is written to calm the thighs and the flow of sand, and you cover that the plague of the crotch is submerged in the corrupted corpse and laid within that which is corrupted by the gray matter, and you care for that which is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of postmenopausal women that comes out the titillic.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	When those that contain moisture are found; and those that contain moisture are found to be uncut in the lunar section of this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And as all is evacuated, this is the completion of the cotyledon and you should leave the entrance open for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And when the cotyledon is complete and is being treated appropriately for that, enter if it is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the aperture of the nodes' spices and of the guttae is, and if the guttae, you should cut over that as it has been said in the section about the guttae.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is extended over that which is not properly closed, you should administer this cauterization as has been said in the section about the cauterization, following what has been said.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the sections of openings that occur by arching or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the arching is broken and the cord is consolidated over that, you should notice that the openings are closed by the arching and the veins through which inflammation and plague are by the artery or vein: four, when the opening is by arching it is longer added to the chest; and when it is pressed on by the fingers, you feel in it that it is stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When that which is by vein is made clear in the manifestation of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	If this section is wrongly cut, and especially in those who leave the ankles bare, and the girdles, and the collar, and the other parts of the body; and it is very large, therefore it is recommended that the cure be avoided, and that which is beyond the limits, or at the top, be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Moreover, about that which is caused by inflammation of the orifice of the urethra, the incision is made in the abdomen along its length; and it is properly cut with uncured ends and the urethra, and the tunics are separated from what is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place over that hole and make it penetrate into the other leg, and stretch the urethra in two places, which causes and you have to extract more urethras from the urethral arches that are in the tenicles.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And plug the location that is between two ligaments and it comes out that which is in it, and the section is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And in the first place, administer treatment in which the pain is caused by entering that limbs; and treat it accordingly when it becomes healthy.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If it is an apoplexy due to a vein section, you should know that you have to hold the force of the attack on the chest and introduce the needle into the place where you had held it, and make it penetrate; and it should be in the double part between which you extract the other part from the other limb, and tie the apoplexy to the bone that you have said to you in the bone of the grape vine of four parts from the extremities of the fil.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you will extract the filament, then enter the needle into the hole where you had inserted the first needle of the entire apoplexy, and tighten the ties of the filament in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Properly clean the apoplexy in the middle of it when you see that it is in this place and that it is seen through the vein, then you should inscribe the superfluity of the chest, and leave it so that from it it is seen.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When you have paused over the vessel that you have submerged in water and oil, and when you administer the cure that is made of caliguas and engaged within it, as soon as it becomes healthy,
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	The capital letter "L" in the text is likely a typo or a mistake, as it does not make sense in the context of the sentence. Assuming that the intended word is "caput," the translation would
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	How does aphasia occur in the artery and vein, and it seems to occur in the nerves when they are struck or affected by excessive work, and by chance.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	When it is necessary to apply a point on the assistant's or helper's body, or in any other location where joint pain is felt, proceed as follows:
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe gout, and it resembles the color of another person's skin, and it appears in the major parts of his body, and when it becomes very violent, it seems like the intestine is stupefied.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	It is not an additional gout in the chest, and therefore the codename is removed, and it is severely injured throughout and does not affect any other parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those who are in the joints do not cover that they are wrapped in iron, for if you manage to release the contraction, it will be easy to heal.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Many who are in the head or face can remove the codename with a sharp pain.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is gout less, you can remove it with that and cut off the root and the trunk of that.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, you can suspend it with that, and exfoliate that part, and remove it as much as possible; and adjust the wound with suture material, and cure that part within which it is healthy.
Capitol .li.	End of chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of gout that happens to the cheek that happens to the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	When the joints of certain people are affected in their stomachs and other parts of the body, and they are called gouty, those that are large are subtle and have a thick lip, and those that are small and those that are much less than the others.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And if you have seen one, and in the stomach of that person there were two that were less like yours, and there was no difference between the white ones, with little wisdom.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were inverted and made, and moisture ran from that time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then you inserted those and held them tight in the foot for eighteen hours, and the other in the chest.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The operation in the insertion of them is that it is considered labor if the thighs are wet, and the color of the intestine is white, wet, with subtle wisdom; if you insert them in the presence of the fire, four points should be made on the skin of the patient, and the sac must be expelled without pain; and if you find the sac, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient is afraid or anxious, keep calm and do not let go of the foot that has just been pricked; instead, hold tight to that spot, and use the hand that was used for that; and apply pressure for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the tightness of the blood vessel; therefore, do not let go of the swelling in the foot, until it is completely separated and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the foot is large, it may cause fear and anxiety, and most importantly, in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you separate the toe nail, and apply cauterization to that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And take care of that when it is healed, the plague is cured.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And keep calm that you do not remove the toe nail that is of dark color, of little sensation, of rough texture, and that it is not cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And when you come back to remember the case appropriately.
Capitol .lii.	I apologize, but the provided text does not contain a valid sentence for
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	The translation of "De curacio de eminencia del umbilic" is: "Of the eminent cure of the n
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The translation of "Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu." is:
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	When pain is felt in the abdomen due to a hernia or inflammation of the tissue, the color of the aposteme (a type of wound) resembles the color of the chest; and the pain appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is for the removal of the intestine, place its position according to that which has been found, with less violent diversity, and when you present that position to the eyes, return it; and quickly he will be able to do it, and a great deal of strength will be needed from the inside of the belly and very hard work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is for wetness, place the lion and it will not be hidden when you present your hand to him, nor will he be tightened, nor will he be crushed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for the sinus, place these salves on the neglected part.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is for the flesh, place this plaster thick, heavy and hard, and it will stick to one amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is for dryness, touch the lion's part with your hand.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The operation in that place is considered to be the sinus of the umbilicus, either for dryness due to archery or veins, or for dryness; you should know that it is prohibited in the cure of him, as there is fear and poverty as it was taught in the capital where I mentioned the plasters for archery and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	When the prominence of the navel is in the belly or on the cloth, you should command that the patient holds the navel with both hands, and extend it; and then, with a tent, encircle around the entire navel, and command that it be held between your own thighs over the navel's axis, and surround it with your fingers in the circuit of the navel above the point where you have placed your hand on the tent; and extend the width of the abdomen to the parts where it is greatly stretched or narrowed, and tie or fasten the cord around the patient's waist.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then extend the width of the abdomen over the belt and insert the said point in that indication to hold the navel; and if you have not cut or held it with the belt, then you should extract it and press it into the parts where the belly is narrowed.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have cut the cloth, then hold it with both hands; and insert the excess into that point.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your arch or vein, then surround that point with your hand, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them in those two firm places and introduce two needles into the circuit around the navel in the crotch, which threads pass through; and tighten the abdomen on four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish, remove the beads and clean the area where the extended flesh falls and settles; or insert it when it is subtle and becomes moist, and properly care for that part which covers the openings inside where it is healthy.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the eminence of the navel is not flesh or moisture, then you should cover it with your hands as we have said and irrigate it with water or moisture, which atrophies in it, and apply a remedy to that part which covers it and helps to consolidate the place.
Capitol .liii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De curacio de cranc.	The translation of "De curacio de cranc" is "Of the treatment of
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	The translation of "Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu" is:
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	When the ancients used to cut the old ones that some cranks were in place where it was possible to eradicate the eruption of the, they did so as if it was in the breasts or in the thighs and the appearance of the members allocated to remove all of that, and especially when beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is ancient and good, you do not know if you can cure of that or not, nor if it has happened to anyone else, nor if it has been done before.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The operation in it is when it is allocated as has been said, you do that and you allocate the thighs and purify the black bile of some cranks, and it is known if it is inflamed with a clear manifestation of anger.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the thigh in the preparation in which it is located at the operation, and prohibit in the twist those that cover for that; and carefully of all parts of the body with good seams for excruciation into which no cause of the reasons of the disease is found.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let run the sand, and do not exclude that leucimeter, and expel the locus, and remove the sand as much as possible from both you and the instrument you can with the one that is at your possible of the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have any objection to the large incision of a vein or an artery, then burn it at the point where the blood flows out, and carefully treat that with another cure within which it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capital of the fifth book.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of gout.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, of the special herbs of gout from water, and the doses of each herb for the cure of the physician.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is not alone the species of althitas, and is not similar to the species of timpanists or the species of yposarcha, for that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this species of gout with iron and it does not work for the physician, consider that if the thigh has been made flat, or if another one is gouty, then as if there were pain in the belly or chest, you should guard yourself from iron, because there is fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see the thigh of a man who is very exuberant and has no other limb but the foot, and it is not young or old, then the hand of the operation of the man is what you elevate between your own thighs, and you minister the stomach to him with your hand, and you pour water on the part opposite the penis, and you take spines according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	When the two points are sharp and of equal length, with a sharp tip; but rather, it should be shortened little by little, so that in the operation, that point does not enter the intestine, and that one is not cut.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And does it consider if the generation of gallstones is from the intestines, that is, whether you cut through the omentum in the amount of three digits on the sides, on the right side over the pecten?
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of gallstones is due to bad posture, your section should be on the left side of the navel by three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of gallstones is due to the uterus, your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it does not matter if your section is on the side of the chest that you want to press the abdomen for not covering that extra fat in that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And drill the entire instrument through that code, and enter it into that section, and raise your hand above the code and the spatula between the code and the siphon, and you remove that; and if the quantity of a pin or a needle.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And if you happen to pierce the thigh with a needle that reaches the spot where the swelling is wanted, and it is located in the stomach.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And pull out that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a silver canula; it is made of silver, or of gold, or of lead, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and at the sides there are three holes: two of one kind and one of another kind; and it is made into a point by the end of the pen, as many times as possible.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the exit of the needle there is an armillary sphere, where when the instrument reaches the stomach, you should turn it over on the instrument so much that you can evacuate the stomach in that amount, and if you do not evacuate that much in that time, then the body will have to resolve the spirit animal, or it may be one of the five that is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Moreover, evacuate according to that amount of the virtue of the stomach and according to what you consider the dispositions of the body of the virtue of the lungs and the beauty of the body.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And when you have extracted the instrument, and released the water that causes it as much as possible, it is held by the belt that holds the tool which is over the cipher of which and recommended to you that you perform this second on the other hand.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And if you repeat the instrument on another day when the patient tolerates it as much, and extract a small amount of water each time, and do this for several days under the fear of causing harm, and keep you from making a mistake because you do not want to use too much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear the patient and give them too much water, you should treat it as if it were buried in sand, move it to the shade, and wait for a long time under the sun; and treat it with desiccating medications if it is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the meal is fitted as much as possible after the extraction of the water, according to what you have heard in water that precedes it.
Capitol .lv.	Capital of Latvia.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the care of children who are born in locations other than the urethra.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	When some children have pain in their bellies, and the head of their mixty is not perforated (or is straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	And this type of cauterization is not perforated (or is too shallow) according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause in the wound a subtle clavicle of blood and tie it with that, and for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the urine is scarce and urinous; and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the blood, it is possible that the urine that was above the place may not be held by this clamp.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	That of which the wound is straight is treated with a plumb clamp, as has been said, for several days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Those in which the wound is not in its place are the most serious, for those who were born and had their throat cut, the reason is that they cannot urinate in the parts below, when they raise their neck to the upper part; and it is not of this generation, for so the semen does not reach the mother's womb, and it is a bad sign.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The first source sentence to translate is:
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation of the flow of sinew, four things may happen to you; and stop here and take the medicine as prescribed by the physician, and cure the wound within which it was inserted if it has been healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol, LVII.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	When white substances accumulate in the prepuce of the head of the penis, the foreskin of the penis, and the adhesion of the prepuce of the penis, it is called phimosis by doctors.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Visible discharges of this white substance occur in the penis and are characterized by dry skin.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, cover that suspends an unctuous substance and separates the entire entrance; and place your hand over the submerged part of the Egyptian cotton; and that, cure the enguent within when it becomes healthy.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the white substance is malignant, of a certain color, then you should cover that you administer cauterization to the incision of the penis and its tip.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	However, if the white substance is not circumcised in the prepuce of the penis head, and one part of the white substance is dedivided from the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then you should cover that you keep the white substance that is divided at the beginning until it is consolidated; and when you cure the deformed one, be sure that it is not trinitrated.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	When injuries or wounds have already occurred on the genitals and outer thighs, it is necessary to clean them thoroughly and prevent further damage or corruption; and apply linen cloths soaked in warm water made from flour of oak galls and mustard seeds.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And apply care to the other remedy when it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If the discharge is pus, then administer cauterization by moonlight in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Two types of cauterization are used for discharge: one for pus and the other for corruption in the placenta.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the tip of the penis is corroded and destroyed at that time, then you should insert into the inner part of the prepuce a catheter tube in order to allow urine for that purpose.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in the one where the prepuce is, and over it there is no circumcision; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or abscess) it is necessary to exfoliate with ground spice inside when the membrane is dissolved and the tip of the penis is completely separated.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to discern those exquisitely, then you should cover that with a layer of earth from the head of the caviar and the prepuce, and thus the prepuce, when it is subtle, is easily pierced through its subtlety by a small hole.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the prepuce from the head of the caviar by a small amount of the subtle substance, which is already wet in the water so that it does not stick to another surface.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And the treatment should be applied as soon as it is solidified.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 7.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the worldling of the children and the cure of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuous asses like other plagues: rather, it is our operation and will, and the doing of that in the children requires us to assign a better operation and take care of those who are lost to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on all free men, who did not use it in their laws, and only because they had acquired through experimentation, which caused the major part of artisans and barbers to stop using circumcision and mundification, and use false lips and piercings.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	You have already tried all these methods and did not improve the effectiveness of the surgery, as it was with the ungla, where four locks were hidden under the codena pus, which was covered by two layers, and then the tonica pus was applied, and finally it was found that another incision and a safer one were needed.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the mundificacio that is done with alphecati, and it is digital, of which they use the sabatiers, is not securely made at the extremity of the male member, where fort leu is found in the trau of the.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, mayes are used, and it is observed that iron and corruption can affect your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the codena of the child is short by nature, and there are not many wounds in that way that does not need mundificacio, and you have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Less of the mundificacio that forfexs and liamentz do, the benefit, my experience describes to me, where the forfexs are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is seen is as the sharpness that is at the end; and so if you prepare your own ma with proportionate two sharpnesses, and make an incision afterwards in a time; and it is made compression of the figura containing the codena of the vergua of all partida, which does not make an error of total.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first source sentence translates to: "And the hands of the primary operation are that you make it last if it is for those who understand a little, which you do not make except when you lie in bed every day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	When that pleasure is felt throughout that entire manuscript, it is likely that it receives your intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	When it is necessary to insert something between the patient's legs, and not to cause pain; and hide the forceps in your hand or on the side of the thigh, so that the child does not see those or other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And insert your hand between the thigh and the groin, and blow in the anus, and remove that which is causing the swelling of the head of the groin, and modify that which is added to it due to tightness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And tie the knot at that place, and tie a string around it with a small loop, and tie the same knot on the other side of the string with good retention, and insert between two strings.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And lift the anus up and hold the head of the groin; and rub the candle little by little and little, as best as you can; and put some powder on it and over the powder, dip in the one that is mixed with olive oil that has been heated recently; and apply that on the other day; and care for that as a curative measure that has been made.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps in molding, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	These are some non-sharp ones and the others are sharp, so that not be the width of the lock, and be the length of the sharp edges as the length of two fingers engaged.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The less mistake in molding is that you often save the internal code whole, or cut off part of it to engrave.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, extend that from your time to the part of your ungla under the apostemacio of the loc and have those second equalities inscribed.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your ungla, then extract that from the outside and inscribe that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if they pass three days, and it is said that the apostemacio is deflated further ahead, then you must enter when it is easy to excoriate the apostema caut, and remove that second equality that is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep the end of the apostemacio away from this, so that it does not come to this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then, cure that person with this gout that has been formed by the dust that has been recommended in the treatise of the dust.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the code is placed on measure, and follows the parts of this, it will not be known to him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	When one has been diagnosed with gout, it is important to follow the treatment plan provided by the doctor. This may include lifestyle changes such as maintaining a healthy diet and staying hydrated, as well as
Capitol .lviii.	 medication or other medical interventions. It is also important to attend all scheduled
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	When treating urinary retention, it is important to follow the treatment plan provided by the doctor. This may include lifestyle changes such as maintaining a healthy diet
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	 of urine retention in the bladder is caused by inflammation of the bladder or by scarring, or by tumors or cysts, and is similar to the symptoms of gout that have been described in the division. In this case, it is important to follow the treatment plan provided by the doctor, which may include lifestyle changes such as maintaining a healthy diet and staying hydrated, as well as any necessary medical interventions. It is also important to attend all scheduled appointments with the doctor to monitor progress and adjust the treatment plan as needed.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine does not dissolve, and you see signs of urinary retention, it is important to seek medical attention immediately. If the doctor suspects that the urine is blocked by a kidney stone or other obstruction in the urethra, they may recommend surgical intervention to remove the obstruction and restore urine flow. It is important to follow the treatment plan provided by the doctor and attend all scheduled appointments to monitor progress and ensure a successful outcome.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	If the foot is swollen and painful, it is important to follow the treatment plan provided by the doctor. This may include lifestyle changes such as maintaining a healthy diet and staying hydrated, as well as any necessary medical interventions. It is also important to apply ice packs or other cold therapies to reduce inflammation and pain, and to elevate the foot above the level of the heart to help drain fluid and reduce swelling. It is important to follow the treatment plan provided by the doctor and attend all scheduled appointments to monitor
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, you should press on the lower part of the vagina with your hand to expel the bladder stone into the rear parts, so that urination is completely emptied.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If the water does not dissolve, it is very important to make points on the thighs with a pointed cautery. Then, insert the instrument called syringe, which is in this form: A silver needle and a subtle lion, like a cane of penis in the subtlety of long bone in the shape of a palm and thumb, at the tip of which is a subtle one.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to expel urine by that which you hold in your hand is to bend the foreskin and pull out the hair or beard for good shaving; and insert the extractions of the foreskin into the rear part of the ring, and insert them into the forfexes if there is any cause for the hair, less introduce it in the canula with vehemence and then enlarge the border and album of the wound.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And press on the thigh with a pound, and rub the vesicle of the eye and the verge with oil of olive and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	When the foreskin is easily introduced into the urethra; and doubles the prepuce over the bulb of the penis; and presses the ring tightly against that; and presses it into the urethra as it passes into the vesica, and the meat enters the cause of the tortuosity, and it is not made to follow this order, but the one in which it was originally.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And gradually extend the foreskin over the string little by little, until the urine comes out of the string.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Extract that and use it for urinary treatment, and do not stop until you have used the ring and enter within when the urethra is emptied and the meat is relieved of its tortuosity.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 16.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of urethral cleansing, it is recommended to clamp and use instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or blister occurs in the urethra, or is scratched or torn, and you want to distill water and medicines in that area, then use an instrument called a clamp, and this is the form of it:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	If the extraction of the patient is noisy, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	In that case, there are three parts: two of one kind and some times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there is a concealment, and it is known that it is a cause of pain, and the following quantity that oppresses that, its addition, when any cause is removed from that tirade of humors, it is inflamed, and when it is expelled, it is known that it is inflamed, and when it is expelled long, the following that causes phlegm in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	If you want to prohibit humors in the vesica, insert the extremity of clampcedra into the humor, and draw out that aqueous which is expelled from the parts of it, where the humor is inflamed in the cavity of clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And insert the extremity of clampcedra into the verge secondly as has been recommended in the ciringua; and draw out that humor from the aqueous which is drawn out, whereby that humor penetrates into the vesica most, and the thigh cent to that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the cristeri subtle is that which the vesica is cristeriized, and that is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	When there is pain in the ear, it may be caused by silver or lead, of which the tip resembles a small quill, and it can be used to remove wax from the ear.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take a vein of the arm, and place it in the water you want to purify in the vein, and then tie it with a strong thread between two firm supports, and heat that water over a fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And insert the end of the cystoscope into the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And stretch the opening of your hand over the vein and the water that has entered into the thigh, and that water has already been absorbed by the vein.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a vein, take a corkscrew and press it into that circle; and perforate the entire circumference; and insert the corkscrew as far as it can go in those tracts, so that it may be removed also if necessary, and then place the corkscrew in that water you want to purify, and use it to remove any remaining humidity and impurities.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	When you have inserted the instrument and made the incision as you did in the vagina, and express the fluid that comes out due to moisture entering the vagina.
Capitol .lx.	This is a Roman numeral, which corresponds to the number 6
De extraccio de peyra.	About the extraction of urine.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the specifics of urine and its cure in medicine, and the difference between urine produced in the urethra and urine produced in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And it has been said that the urine in which I operate most often and cut is...
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the urine produced in the bladder is the one that remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you report this clear and brief description.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, say that urine produced in the bladder mainly affects the child; and from the symptoms of it, it seems to be water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the vagina covers its private parts, and moistens the eyes, and makes them red, and dresses itself; and at that time the anus is exposed to those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	When the child has reached twelve years of age, it is time for the cure; and it is difficult to cure in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In young people, it is easier to be cured where there are fewer.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And from that which the urine is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is few, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And how to reach the cure of that, at the beginning of that which we call the catharsis of Christians, which takes away the entire fence that is in their bellies; then that fence has some prohibitions for the prevention of the urine of that one, you must have an examination of the bladder.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And if you are near the catharsis of their feet and it is concentrated and compacted in such a way that the urine descends to the bottom of the bladder or jumps from one place to another, some prohibitions have been made for that.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And if you make that cezer between your own and the other's, and the others have left their legs apart, so that the bladder is entirely made to lean towards the parts that are outside.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	When it is necessary to cut or carve that or that entire part of the body.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in the space, then cut as much as possible on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not cut off the entire foot, then cover that with oil and leave it in the left hand side of the bed, if the patient is a child, or the right side if it is an adult, and insert that into the vagina.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And when you want the stone to enter the foot that is already outside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert that small part into the vaginal opening.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And press on that with your hand and expel that into the parts of the body that you cut off.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the midwife to press on the vagina with her hand; and command another midwife to extend the fingers on the parts that you cut off, and to tighten the suture that is left in the place where the cut was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And insert sponge moistened with oil into the incision of which this is the form of the stone:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customarily called gout by doctors. The doctor then makes points on the surface of the foot using a pointed cautery, reduces the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and places their hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. The doctor has already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	When you know that from the urine there is some substance that makes it difficult for the analysis, then...
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that water, it resembles a gallstone, and is round, and it makes the analysis more difficult.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which causes the urine to be difficult to analyze, adjust in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not for-gotten, you know that you must engage with that, or that you gently press over it, the end of which is the same as the end that you press on the urine, and do not escape from it; or that you insert the subtle instrument with a curved end further down.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot press on that, then amplify the opening a little, and if you see blood, reduce the pressure on that which has been bittered with vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the urine is less than usual, then at the beginning you push it into the mouth of the vesica and place it over it; and then push a little water; and if it seems to be less than usual, then do so.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, ignorance is that you have inserted it into that great section, which then happens to the thigh: whether it is dead or living, or if it is in the continuous distillation of urine, so that the place is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May there be an easy expulsion of the stone if it is outside, or an engine in the fracture of the uterus that exits through the vagina.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with pieces of aloe and garden earth, and press it tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place oil or rose oil and vinegar on that bandage, or rose oil and vinegar and water, so that the stitch does not come out.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And return the thigh to its place above the sit bone, and do not slip the limb inside on the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when it comes out, wash the place with water and oil, and apply an ointment made of water and oil every day until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	When plague occurs in the skin, it may cause blisters and ulcers, and they appear as if the flesh is frozen in the vesicle, and from there the prohibited urine (and this is known by the discharge of the urine from the urethra) enters the plague and extracts that urine, so that the plague causes the vesicle to rot in the body and the putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the plague with water, salt and water, and is opposite to all species, and it is convenient for the cure when it is healthy.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover all the time of the cure when you lie down on your side and adjust the medicines that were placed on the place.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the gravel is small and is in the meat of the thigh, and sticks to it, and the prohibited urine is present, then treat this as you recommend, so that many are cured by this cure and are not accused of cutting; and you have already used this, and it is the form of the perforator:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	The first line "de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust" seems to be a description of a medical instrument made of bamboo or another hard material
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	This line seems to be describing a procedure where a hand is placed and pressure is applied to the verge of the eye socket to prevent it from returning to its original position within the socket.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	This line seems to be describing a procedure where a hollow needle is inserted into the eye socket to make an opening for the instrument that will be used to remove the eye.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	This line seems to be describing a procedure where the hollow needle is rotated within the eye socket, gradually making an opening larger and larger until the urine is completely drained.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	This line seems to be describing a procedure where the hand is placed on the eye socket and pressure is applied to the area around the eye socket, causing the urine to drain out of the eye socket and the eye socket to become healthy again.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	This line seems to be describing a procedure where the patient's eye socket is closed and a hand is placed on the area around the eye socket to prevent any further drainage of urine. The doctor may also use another instrument to close the eye socket.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And apply it over the heel in that crevice between two joints.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And remove the ligament and modify the tendon, which is made of sinew.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to remove the ligament from the heel, but rather because it does not return to its sheath, and the other ligament remains, when the tendon is slid along the sole of the heel, the coda returns to its place and takes the sinew.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And so it is necessary for you when you have the tendon out, that you raise the coda at the parts where it has been cut, or that you return to the usual complement, and takes the sinew with them and takes the sinew with them.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitulum.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Chapter 60. Extraction of the heel from the females.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	 The heel in female femurs is not commonly found.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you find the heel in any of those, the cure is difficult and it is forbidden by cruel hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very old.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second is that you do not find a woman who is well-educated and knows how to clean herself when she goes to the doctor, or is one of the women who has not been taught.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you have not found a woman who knows this art, especially the operation.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth is that the location of the section over the foot in women is longer than the location of the foot, so it requires a deeper cut, and there is fear of it.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If necessary, you may have to take a well-educated and skilled woman, and it is not easy.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are not familiar with this, you can choose a woman who is subtle and skilled, or present a well-educated and experienced woman in the field of women's health, or a woman who is at the beginning of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make the presentation, and command the one who will do everything you ask, from the inquiry about the foot to the beginning; the reason is that he looks to see if the woman is old, and you should cover that you want to say at the end of the foot and the foreskin.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If that fails, cauterize that spot with the given tool, and command the one who inserts it to do so on that spot.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not visible, command the midwife to insert the given tool into the woman's private parts and examine the perineum, making sure that her left hand holds the vaginal opening tightly and compresses the spot well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If that fails, command the one who inserts it to gradually push that spot into the vaginal opening, dividing it into parts according to the size of the vagina until it reaches the end of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert it into the corresponding part of the woman's private parts, wherever it is comfortable for her to stand and hold the perineum in that position, and she should not feel any pain from the cauterization tool inserted earlier.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray into that incision, and if the perineum is felt, command the midwife to adjust the incision according to the amount she knows that the perineum will swell from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You know that the species of pebbles are movements: four of those are few and large, rough and sharp, long and round, and have notches.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	This means: "So you know how many species there are of him for that which you signify over that which you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you wish to remove a gallstone, adjust in the location where it was passed and take it out within an hour after it has been dissolved, and return to your operation once the stone is removed outside the body.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you have the necessary tools for the removal of stones in men's operations, so that you can help those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you wish to remove a gallstone, and you know that the expulsion of the gallstone is from the gallbladder duct, then place some powder on the area and stretch it with your fingers and tighten it, and do not repeat this; and remove the stone and do not extract it outside, for fear that the patient may die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And cure the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the gallstone is exposed to the air and it dries out, and then return to your operation once the stone is removed outside the body.
Capitol lxii.	Capital LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of sectioning an inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is not simply an addition of moisture in the white plum, which is left by the codon of the gentry containing the heat, and is called a cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	If some veins are in the proper fascia, which is prepared by nature in the part of the heat, and if it is not another heat; and it is the codon of the gentry between the white plum, which I have said, and it is not known unless it is tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is by dilating the which causes it to spread among the gentry, and some veins may be caused by puncturing with a point over the gentry.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This moisture has different colors, whether the color is red or it becomes citrine or bloody, or black, or stinks like excrement, or white, and it is known that it is less.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The means by which this addition of moisture is cleaned up are those that it is known for: whether it is in the white plum which I have said, if it is in the cavity, then you reduce it to a small length as a figure of the heat, and appear the gentry, where the moisture counts that of all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the proper panicle, then you should cut it off at its base and leave another one, as some people consider it to be another panicle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white cipher, then you should cut it off further.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	If you want to know the color of the moisture, then spread the color of the moisture on the cord that is placed in the groove of which the form precedes; and after that, if it is seen in the clothing of the groove, judge from there what it is for.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the care of the man's wound, you should cover what commands at the thigh that it is a partial amputation if it is possible, and sometimes the cost of the part.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if he is lying on his back over any cause with a few people, and pauses further the clothes.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And if you settle on the left side of the patient, and command the attendant to follow the right side, which extends his hand to two fingers at the cord of the genitals and the base of the mirror of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And roughly cut the skin and separate the vertebrae of the upper part of the patient's back, along the length of about a foot and a half.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	If the cut is too close to the line of the buttocks, it should be made so that it reaches the white part of the hip bone.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And clean the area, and observe it, and keep your cleaning so that you do not injure the area; and your cleaning should be done with the part of the hand that is suspended above the elbow and scrutinize the cleaning according to what you can possibly do.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And make a larger hole in the hip bone, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And separate the inner lips of the cut from the upper part of the hip bone, and extend the hole to the parts below; and do not touch the vertebrae of the patient's back, and insert the hole in the hand that you can possibly hold.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert it completely or in the buttocks, and especially the lower part, and carefully examine the insertion of the hole, as if you do not scrutinize it perfectly, it is not guaranteed that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the joints of the body are processed in that deformed position during your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the femur, return the cut piece to its place, and adjust the edges of the hip bones of the male patients as a suture, and care for it as the others, if it is healthy.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the heart is corrupted by another illness, then cover the veins that cause it to be heavy, remove the heart, and treat this one according to what they have called it.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the wound is divided into several parts, know that those are the hernias; therefore, insert it in that part according to what you have done in the other dissection; and if you see that it is an operation, do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then remove the scent, and enter into the submerged layers of wool that are in oil or red oil; and stop another layer of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and expand it over two gowns and the belly's mirror; and stop doubling drapes and pulvishes, and lie them on this one according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then make the girdles of two drapes and their humps of wool according to this pattern; and their points are at the ends that are pushed by the handle or by wet hair, and they are added to the structure in the neck of the necklaces, and the one of the ends grabs the belly inside the two, and the other grabs the pendant's end, and two extramits are over two thighs and two extramits on two cufflinks, and all the restriction is adjusted in the neck of the necklaces.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	If some of these hernias are artificially treated with cauterization instead of sectioning with iron; and if you take a subtle cautery and insert it into the codon of the gut, and ignite it after they have reported that the white bladder containing water has been discovered, and then you take cauterization in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It is assembled in Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then perforate that bladder, and ignite after all the water has been expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the bladder with pins, and scrape it with pins, and scrape the cauterized subtle one that is ignited; and insert it next to you as possible after you have extirpated all of it, and keep the heat away from your hand that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than sectioning operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you have any objection to cauterization at the time of sectioning or at the time of cauterization or sanc flow, know that this objection is for your own good, and I cure it with the cure that suits me according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	When the patient is asleep, and does not hope for the second operation due to its horror, you should administer an injection according to my recommendation; and it is when you certify that you must, in order to confirm the meanings, that this hernia is painful.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	You must make sure that you place the patient on any raised bed, with a pointed cautery in the lower part of the spine, and then stop the puncture after the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if the wound is wide across the entire hernia.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand over the area and hold it there, to prevent the hernia from coming out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And care for that after the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	When the pain is greatest at the time you make the puncture: and that is not done except for this reason: if the white gauze in the orifice of the plague causes contraction and prohibits the release of the hernia, you must make sure that you place in the plague penitence or instrument of the type from which the hernia is extracted from the hernias, the form of which precedes; or adjust in the oppression of the plague a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	You know that the urine returns, and it is excreted after about three or four days; and when it is added, you should be careful not to perforate it second by second, so that the patient does not suffer during those days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Section on hernia of the flesh and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in this section on this hernia there is fear of poisoning in the larger parts; because I have seen the release of it and its survival for that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you remember the operation in that and the species of the apprentices.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that the apprentices are born in the chests of those whose genes are combined and is caused by sharp acute causes: either sudden acute inflammation of the genes, or by puncture.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And is the color of the apprentice according to the color of the chest, and it does not become pale in that pain, and it is a heavy hernia.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And very much the apprentice is herniated, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel at that.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	When some swellings are caused by the blockage of the arteries, and by inflammation of those parts that have already been felt as the remorse of the patient, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Many people know that inflammation of the arteries is caused by the dispersion of the apoplexy when you compress that part with your hands; and it does not matter if it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	Many people know that inflammation of the veins is not caused by any cause other than the compression of the patient's hands.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this subject there is a section and on the others as well; and that you insert the code of the genese, and then extend the hoodet to the parts thereof, and take out that from the white cipher, and untie the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensors of the plug that you took out of the whole part of the hoodet.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the hoodet is already closed with those solid parts, you should know that you have to take out the hoodet and insert it there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If adhesion occurs due to any cause within the gallbladder, or if it occurs between the blades, you should cover that entire adhesion and insert it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the adhesion is birth in the location where the adhesion is, you should cover that entire cause and extract as much as possible from there, as they have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the entire wound with a layer of clean linen dipped in rose oil and see; and care for that as you would for the other patient who is being healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the surgery for hernia that is protruding.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Inflammation is wrapped around by some wrapping-like structure similar to the mollification of the testicles, and it becomes difficult to perform exercises and walking over the thigh.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the surgery for this thigh, there is fear of that which was previously remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is covered with an operation in the second place that I did in the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	1. It means: "Say that you cover the patient's lower body over an elevated bench; and raise the suspensory of the testicles to the parts further away; and tie the codpiece of the genitals at the thighs where the braids are that you wear on your hair; and hold onto those other servants, and extend them vehemently.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	When it is necessary to insert an instrument through the right side of the thigh, it is customary to use a spatula made of gut.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then remove all the parts that you have mentioned in the extraction of the gallbladder, which are in the templates.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then insert an awl into the one that has a double hole, and fix it in the first of those places where the wounds occur, and fix it in the other end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then insert those through the middle of the thigh, according to its length, and extract that which is composed of the moist and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then cure the plague by curing the other plagues in which you want to be generated by those that cause the thighs which do not have one of two genes, and it is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If wounds occur in all the thighs, it is necessary that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for this reason shrink to the thighs, so that they are deprived of all nutrition by the incision of the thighs, and that they become hard, or that they shrink because it is not good for them.
Capitol .lxv.	I apologize, but the provided text does not contain a single sentence labeled
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	The given text is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in an unknown language
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The given text is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in an unknown language. However, based on the context and the use of certain words, it seems to be describing a hernia that has occurred due to a tear in the abdominal muscles, causing the intestines to protrude through the tear. The text is discussing the treatment or cure for this hernia.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	The given text is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in an unknown language. However, based on the context and the use of certain words, it seems to be discussing the causes of the hernia rupture. The text mentions that the rupture can occur due to various reasons such as trauma (e.g., hitting, cutting, or clamoring), heavy objects, or even by mistake.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The given text is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in an unknown language. However, based on the context and the use of certain words, it seems to be discussing the symptoms and progression of the hernia rupture. The text mentions that the rupture can occur gradually over time, without any sudden pain, and that the intestines may protrude through the tear as the hernia grows larger.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the pain is felt in the gallbladder, at the beginning it causes intense pain; and there are different apparent symptoms later on the same chain, and this is due to inflammation of the bile duct, and the cause of this pain is in the parts affected by the gallbladder.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some folds are forgotten in the gallbladder, and this hernia is called the intestinal cecum.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some folds are caused by ventilation, and some folds are in the gallbladder wall, and here they are held down, and there is great pain from the thighs, and some folds cause pain that becomes more intense when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the spices of this disease, there is fear that it may be avoided by the catching in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the maneuver of the operation of this is that you command the patient to return to their bed, and if they obey, then it should be covered over the patient's col between their legs, and lift the folds of the gallbladder.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	When the rib cage is stretched and the testicles are separated into their places, and it is inserted into the testicles completely along its length; and then it is held in place by two lips of the section that indicates to fill the section as much as possible for those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	If the section is second in quantity, then it may be possible that the one you are thinking of will forget the other.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And remove those fetters that are left on the testicles, as soon as the white, hard cipher of any part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then enter the true one into the body that is in the white, hard cipher of any part, as soon as the testicle is removed, and then into the second cipher, and free from the adherence that is on the back of the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And hold the rib cage in its place, and extend the white, hard cipher on both sides, and lift the testicle with the cipher to the section's end; and command the minister to extend the testicle and you dissolve the adherence that is behind in the completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When the woman says that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in the white, hard bone, it means that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in the bone.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find any cause in the belly, then press on that with your hand.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Then take a needle of the same size as the gallbladder, and insert it into the belly until you enter the desire of the bone, which is the base of the testicles, which is four times its size; and then insert the ends of the four needles into the four corners of the figure on the crotch; and then take away that needle from the bone that has been said to be the base of the testicles.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the ends of the needles and take them out, making sure they are very strong inside the bone that has been said to be the base of the testicles. Then do not push too hard on any part of the body, as this may cause an abscess to form.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	Then pause another vein later, after three days; and these two veins will be on the bone that has been said to be the base of the testicles, which is the size of the one before. Then insert all the remaining veins in a round shape, and take out the remaining veins.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And you should insert your hand into the space beyond the lower part of the testicles, making a section through which the pain will run and as it has been recommended in that doctors have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And you should apply wax that is submerged in oil and stop at the plague; and apply the ligament that has been recommended (and some white veins are cauterized, which doctors have said about the incision of the gallbladder, where a few veins fall) and make sure the ligament goes inside so that it does not fall.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the pain of the gallbladder is delayed, you should drink water with a tail, and stop over there as it falls according to what doctors have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And cure the plague with the other treatment for the plagues that is cured inside.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of ventilescent hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia it is not seen that what has been done was made with great care during the treatment of the patient.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first thing that was done was that it was made as recommended in the hernia that is made; which is that you lie on the way that is over the ease of the patient; and you dry in the middle of the room near the post that I ordered, inside where the vases fall, if they do not break.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	When the plague has been cured, as they have said that it is cured within, it must be treated accordingly.
Capitol .lxvii.	Capitol Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disproportion that is found in the eunuchs.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some have seen a rupture in the eunuchs as has been said, and they have indicated the location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not give any cause to the intestines in the eunuchs; and if they do, it is very little; and then return to be in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged as it should be, a fissure is made in the gallbladder where the intestine is placed in the gallbladder; and this happens due to the extension of the gallbladder which is in the eunuchs as has been said, which cause is that the gallbladder is extended, and it is softened and the location from which it is extracted is indicated.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is by cauterization as has been said, which precedes the narrative of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some have been cured by iron according to this method: and that is, the thigh is placed on the patient's shoulder, and the location of the rupture of the apostemas emerged is cut off by the latitude according to the quantity of three ditz.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	When the white bile that is at the top of the coil is discovered,
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the lancet and place it over the prominent part of the bile duct, and press it against the stomach.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then approach the two most prominent bumps on the end of the radial bone of the wrist, and adjust one of them to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the bone, and do not cut the wrist, nor extend the hand, nor another cause as you know in the treatment of inguinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat the disease, and when you insert the fists, cleanse that and restore the hernia within the area that is solidified; four the wrist is contracted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is better in this place, where it is pushed for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 88.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the cojones of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The cojones of the testicles are seen to be softened in healthy men because the flesh that is between those parts is also softened, and the observation of it is made.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary to apply this to the patient who is in treatment for the disease that causes pain in the thigh second according to the side, and softens all of the cojones that are mollified over the natural cojones; and then adjust the lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you wish, in the beginning, the excess of the softened codon is three or four layers thick or five and is firmly sutured.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And insert between the sutures; and take care for the cure of other diseases that come in when it is healed and leaves the pains.
Capitol .lxix.	Capital, Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, and it is for this reason that I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to recall it except by these hands, of which one is to remind you of the knowledge of the physician when he is buried in that, which knows the cure of the animal to which it belongs; and the other hand is to tell you that we have need of castration of other animals for our benefits, as for mules, and for the mouths of oxen, and for pigs, and for the appearance of the animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is made in two ways: either by cutting or by slitting with a knife.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	When a joint pain is caused by a bone that has been broken, the way to operate is to cut the animal in half, entering within those parts that are softened and hit, and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And hold on to those parts with your hand inside, if they are not resolved and you do not see the contact further away.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When a wound is caused by a cut and cutting, know that you have the animal in your hand and press the girdle of the testicles of the other side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And tie the suspensors, and insert over each leg of another cut within which two legs proceed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And insert those parts that will have scratched.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not cover those of the cylinder with any cause, only the subtle cylinder that is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this castration is better than that caused by a fracture, because a fracture of the thigh causes pain in the testicles for the animal to want to flee.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague within it when it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	I apologize, but the provided text does not contain a single sentence with
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	The text you provided is in Latin and translates to "About the Cure for Hermaphroditism" in
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	The text you provided is in Latin and translates to "In men, hermaphroditism has two forms: one where the space appears in the abdomen of the testicles, in which case there are four nipples on the female side of the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When some visible signs of urine are found in the testicles' coil.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is a special case: it is that the woman's hymen covers the penis as much as two testicles of a man and in the same way as the pubic hair of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure is of three kinds: of two men and one kind of the woman.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it seems that you are interested in those sharp points when the fever is eliminated from that, and that you cure those of the other diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, where urine is found in the coil of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of the lengthening and eminence of the female organs for causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lengthening is much more noticeable when the cause is natural and when it is stretched and becomes legible; and some signs are magnified in some women to such an extent that they spread as much as in men and during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	When you have the excess of lenten meat in your stomach or intestines, and it has been there for a while.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not linger in incarceration, more especially at the root of the flesh, because it will not let go of the dregs of the blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And take care to keep that cure from those plagues which have cured her.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The more fat there is in the flesh, the more it will be filled with horror when it is cut open, and the more it will be wasted in the parts that are next to it (and for that reason it was called "gout" in the first place); therefore, when you cut it open, take care not to waste it as you would waste lenten meat, and cure that which has been cured.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is that which comes from the woman's womb and is not perforated, or is too small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And is it natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is because of the gout that has preceded it, and that is made or because of unsuitable fat or because of a subtle substance or spice.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	When it is necessary to make points on the body, whether in the head, neck, shoulder, or chest, and to avoid cutting, squeezing, or pulling, and above all, the mistress forbids this.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	When it is believed that the cause of the pain is due to menstruation, if the symptoms are apparent, proceed; otherwise, carefully examine that part with your thumb or finger.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the symptoms are due to subtle secretions and affect the lips, then carefully cut and separate that part.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And if you place your hand over the lips, and then pause the fingers on the indicators of the most sensitive places.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And if the woman is lying on her side, with her thighs extended, and then extends the lips as far as possible, cutting that subtle secretion and allowing the menstruation to flow, and the pain to subside.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And wrap it with lint and bind it with thread, and place it over that location, and keep it there for the day that that location is not yet solidified.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	When the cipher is large and thick, you should cover that part with your left hand or right hand.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	When the oppression is due to flesh, you should suspend that part under your arm and insert it there.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if they are your medicines that make the flow of blood stop from your gout pain, then use them as soon as possible, and also dragon's blood, and essences, and adjust the album of Houd.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then provide a wide-mouthed tube for the purpose that the plague is not solidified.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold it for the time of the disease and administer calx of salt.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then be cured by the other cure for the consolidation when it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some people have accidents in the more distant countries of other animals, and you should cover that part with your hand according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	When it is for a crow's foot, the crow's foot that is in the more distant is not a false contradiction to iron in the same manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a language that
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	This line appears to be in Latin and can be translated as: "Of the cure of hemorrhoids and tails and red blotches that occur in the conception of women." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a more accurate translation or understand the intended meaning.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	When I appreciate the opening of the veins' mouths more than those that are continuously corroded, and as they are old and are caused by emorroydas, they are called so.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the specifics of those and the symptoms of those, and tell which ones receive care and which ones do not receive care.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that emorroydas and those are when it is in the preon of the mare and not appear at the feeling, in those there is no need for care.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	More of those are those that are in the opening of the mare over those that have sensation, those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover that you place the female in more frigidity and extend the hand at the forfexes, or at the dry skin, and insert those into the wounds.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And cover those with dust from the flux of the wound of one of the inscisciva's bites, it is as if it were an ache and resembles to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And rub the patient's feet for an hour, and then stop that in wet frigidity.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of the sinus persists, then make that cut in desiccation of some and of olds of milgrant and of qualities and of similarities.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then prepare flour of oats and comforts that this is honey and see if you agree and make plaster with it on the back of him.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the sinus is abscessed, then so be it; and if not, make it stick with two ventouses, and to his nipples his excavation.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and submerge it with the sweet of cinnamon or the sweet of anise or the sweet of ginger, and make it stick to the place; and then care for the place if it is found inside that it is healthy.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May I ask what the matter is with your sharp gaze, covered that you know that I am telling you this second that I said in that tongue of yours in our union.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for that inside that it is healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of an ectopic pregnancy in the female.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Specific types of gangrene occur in the extremities, such as cranc (gangrene of the toe), apostema (gangrene of the arm), ulcerations (ulcers), adhubelat (gangrene of the leg), erpetromens (gangrene of the hand), fistulas (fistulas), emorroyas (gangrene of the face), raguarrias (gangrene of the thigh), and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and their specific types and cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And what do you ask about gangrene in this book? Is it the type of gangrene that is most common among the gangrene, and if so, how is the operation of the iron made?
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	And do you ask if the pain of gangrene in the early stages is acute and caused by percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it encircles and if that overwhelms the sentiment, then not to perforate the abdomen and cure that one with what helps in the maturation after the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	When you want to lay the woman on a bed that has pillows; and recline on her side and adjust her shoulders to the part of the abdomen that is in front of the stomach, and her hips are expanded, and raise her arms away from her sides, and let her hands lie down on her knees, and this will be convenient for you.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife should follow the lady's direction and administer the instrument that is used to open the uterus in the form that will be suitable for those causes that you will perform.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument that you use to open the uterus of the woman, and it is not more than the preon of the uterus and the hand of the thighs.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the preon of the uterus, you should cover the preon of the uterus with powder so that it is not allowed for any instrument to be inserted into the uterus.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should cover the vertex that is in the instrument of the lady and let the midwife hold the vertex and turn it while it is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the inflammation appears, and it is touched to the chest and neck, and it is wet, you should cover that with a cloth to prevent the disease from spreading further.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the sore is excreted, you should cover that in the plague with a submerged object made of olive oil or red wine, and place the calx on the seccio in the preon of the larger bone.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the larger bone and over the wet submerged in water lana made of malvas.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be cured within two days, and when it is healthy, you can remove the cloth made of the submerged object in water.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some veguadas are washed with water and the plague is cleaned with water that is made of honey and melted wax, and then it is returned to its original position.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the plague is removed from the washed limb, you should cover that with a cloth to prevent the cure of the patient, having cured that part with the remedy that has been said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided does not appear to be a
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	This line seems to be in Portuguese, not the medieval language you mentioned earlier. Here's a possible translation: "Teach the midwives how to handle the natural flow of menstrual blood when they see a second, unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The first source sentence translates to: "A necessary cause is that the midwife must observe the beginning of the natural figure of the child per hernial bands, and it is because when you see the woman express her parts and desire to smell the air, and over that is released for the part above which is on the body, and quickly the labor pains of the fetus are felt, one knows that this part is a natural figure, and it is the pain of the fetus on the umbilicus, and the second one is suspended or hanging from the umbilicus.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those symptoms, you should cover the belly of the patient with something to prevent excessive warmth when they lie on their side, and place it over the abdomen, and it is recommended to cover it with good ventilation.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	If that part is not natural and not usable, then when the embryo is lying on your feet and the belly of the patient is lying in front of the head of the patient and the knees of the patient, or on the chest of the patient, or on the abdomen of the patient, and it is leaned over the shoulder of the patient, and it seems like the figures of the patient's non-usables.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause is for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you are showing all the figure of those, and what engine is in those for which it is significant for this and has been over this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain is lying on the side of the head by natural means, and that is very strong on the female and it is made in that difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of the patient has been weakened, then you should make that seizure, or that the women hold the patient, and evaporate the conh of the patient's fenugreek and olis humitz.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	When the doctor inserts the speculum between the patient's thighs, or if it is necessary to do so inside the vaginal opening, or if it is necessary to do so inside the anus, it is customary to do so with a wet speculum.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fet arrives.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If the fet does not arrive, it is believed that the woman's cervix is covered with mucus from the ptilli and mucus from the fenugreek.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And order the woman to relax and push, and the midwife to push and hold her vaginal opening with her hand for a hour or so, until the fet comes out completely.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if more force is needed to deliver the fet, it is believed that you should gradually reduce the force little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If the woman does not obey the command, place her on a bed and lift her feet up, and cover the bed with a blanket; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the shock.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the thumbs are not tucked in and do not fit, then insert them and extract the remainder of the foot or limb from the body, and remove that part, equal to it, because that will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	When the fetus is pressing on the patient's feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is pressing on the patient's feet, you should push them down and convert the small fetus into a large one, and then pull out that part, and then take a piece of cloth from the patient and stretch out those small parts.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	How much the fetus is pressing on the patient's thighs, then you command him to express it and make it exit through that hole, as if God will allow it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if you don't forget that they have commanded, then you return the small fetus part by part as you place your hand over that second natural figure, and that will make you forget the pressure of the fetus.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited that they have commanded, then you take mustard and gum dissolved in water, and apply it all over the body with good percussion, and then line up those lines according to what the woman has said, and push down from the belly of the man.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cezer in water beef, as you reach the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When sometimes the parts of you that I have removed from you are softened, then I place them under the smoke of my mouth and under the pause of that to you.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	When the subincision is covered for an hour, you should place a cushion on a small piece of cloth, and then tie it around the mouth of the patient, remove it, and press the lower part of the abdomen of the patient with a gentle compression, so that the wound heals as quickly as possible.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Observation of the foot on the intestines and their surrounding areas.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the wound heals in this form, you should carefully insert your fingers one by one; and the woman's leg should be raised on the side of the thigh, and her feet should be placed below, and those should be supported on the bed, and your hands should be covered.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press gently on the abdomen of the patient, and remove as much as possible that is left of the feet from the belly that has been prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wound does not heal, you should hold the feet and move them gently, and press as much as possible on the hip bones one by one, so that the wound can be in the parts below.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	When you enter the patient's private parts and take out the small piece by piece, and order the woman to express herself when the small part is taken out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The most common way to treat a hernia is through surgery.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	The doctor will perform a reduction of the hernia, unless it cannot be reduced, then they will lift the woman and pull her towards the other end.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If the hernia cannot be reduced, then place the woman on the bed, and press her thighs with firm pressure, and apply ointments to the areas that are sore and recommend mucilage ointments.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the pain becomes severe, place the woman on the bed, and study the reduction of the hernia, and take out the second natural part, and make her vomit and order her to understand that she must enter if she wants to get better.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The most common way to treat a hernia is through surgery. The doctor will make an incision in the patient's abdomen and push the hernia back into its proper position. The excess skin and tissue are then removed, and the incision is closed with sutures or staples.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	When the midwife holds the child's head and gently turns it little by little, and thus makes it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when you are ready and have stopped pressing on the abdomen of the patient who has been recommended olive oil and mucous substances.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And when you command that the midwife makes small cuts and when it is time, she puts a piece of cloth on a cloth and commands her to be inclined at an angle to the right, and commands her to compress; and then she tightens it.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	 The fetus is ready to be born on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the time comes to give birth on the second occasion of this maneuver, consider, and you should insert the second needle into your own hand after it has been dried.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is hung over the face and neck of the patient, you should insert the needle into the bag, so that it does not stick and hangs.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And press the child on the parts of the dentition when you have paused that second and order the woman to watch for any signs, and if it is not coming out, then pull it out gently with your hand.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	This phrase can be translated as "The end of many newborn pains." It suggests that the process of giving birth to multiple
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	This sentence can be translated as "Many twins are born with the same motions, and some have three or four, which is strange and difficult to understand; but this is not caused by nature, and it is not alive." It suggests that the birth of multiple twins with similar characteristics is unusual and difficult to explain, and it is not a natural phenomenon.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	This sentence can be translated as "And count those, whether they are multiples or single, and separate them by ciphac, distinguishing those within the ligament of each umbilic of each and some that are forgetsome like an excess natural process, and some that are not like what has been reported." It suggests that the twins should be counted and separated based on their origin, whether they are single or multiples, and their position within the ligament of the umbilic. Some may be considered as a natural excess, while others may not fit the reported description.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	This sentence can be translated as "And if they are difficult to care for, the child's upbringing and coming to understand what has been reported about the non-natural figures, you must treat them accordingly as has been reported." It suggests that if the twins are difficult to care for, the child's upbringing and understanding of the reported non-natural figures should be taken into consideration when treating them.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the midwife is skilled and knows how to cause gout that is easy, quick, and effective, and is experienced in all figures according to the case of the man prepared for the doctor's care, leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember that this is formed from the matrix by the embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighteenth, and you must now verify that a woman aborts only at the fifth, and another one is formed, which causes pain due to the measurement of the glorious saws.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And it is also important that the midwife knows how to do that when she seems like that, and then stops doing that as soon as possible.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus according to what has been said in the division of medicine and does not cause harm, and you have tried using the operation, it is important that you consider if the woman is of good nature and not from those accidents by which she suffers loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying on her back with her head inclined and her thighs raised, it is necessary to cover her.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The physician should hold those parts or lay her on the bed so that this does not extend beyond the delivery of the child.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And if you moisten the mouth of the more severe patient with oils, humors, and melted wax, and semen of Licia, it will help.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And apply the physician's hand to her, with those oils and humors, and enter the woman's mouth for ease in the more severe patient, and position it near the location where the nails are in the child.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And in the appropriate places: then consider if the child is prepared to be placed on the mother's head, and you should keep your nails in the ears, or in the collar, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or in the beard, or in the shoulder blade, or in the groins, or in the hypochondriacs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the treatment is on the feet of the patient, then apply it to the instep or between the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And cover the eye with the other hand, and straighten the curve of the arm in that location which is between the two bones of the left shoulder, and enter the arm easily and keep the eye on those locations which have the bones, and if it penetrates to the cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and keep the other hand in its proper position or the third if necessary, so that it is not too far away, and not extended beyond its right angle, just enough.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And be careful in all parts, so that the treatment of the patient is effective as it is done in tooth extraction for the eradication of the disease.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And cover that which is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of the patient is held, then cover that the mother of the hand knows well the position of those bones and enters expertly and revolves around those that are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the foot is forgotten, then the hands should be moved to enter the location which is pushed out; and make sure that all the foot is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the patient's leg is dislocated and it cannot be reduced by force, then cover that part with a cloth; and extract that part from there where everything has been taken out, and insert it either in the joint of the leg or in the thigh.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And cover those points on the other leg and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the foot is large, or it causes pain in the dislocation, or the tip of the toe is adjusted, then cover those points between the sharp spines and cut the tip of the toe, or remove that from any instrument which is called an "alundat," the form of which is like the others instruments in the capital which is proper to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the foot is large by nature: and cover that part with alum, or take that part alum as they have said; and extract those bones from there with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	If the head is dislocated and it is forced, then cut inside that which humidity is in the chest which is fundamented.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated, and there is no obesity, you should insert the needle as far as it is possible for you to reach.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the opening of the abdomen is adhesed or in the stomach, you must cover that hole which the moisture makes in it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the feces is on the feet, you should take the smaller end of the tube towards the mouth of the larger one.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the stomach is inflated and the chest, you must cover that part which the drap has over your mouth, and expel the stomach and the chest through that hole which runs through it that is in those parts.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still awake and return to the vagina, insert the finger on the left side; if the mouth of the larger one is swollen, introduce the finger in the prepuce, and close it with the thumb, and insert it into the mouth of the larger one, and enter it with one or two fingers.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the mother is cut for childbirth, and it happens to the child, then you should cover it with a cloth so that it does not get cold; then apply some ointment made from wet greasy substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply ointments; and follow the patient in warm and moistening substances.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the tumor is on the side of the face, it is best to apply an ointment; and apply that which has been prescribed in the tumor seen.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If that is not possible, it is best to apply a poultice; and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And do not leave any cause of dinting on the skin.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	When you have completed your operation, apply that which has been prescribed for the cure in the cushions cut by the childbirth, which happened to the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If diarrhea occurs, apply warm ointments and continue with the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have seen a woman in the belly of whom was a tumor that had been killed, and placed another focused on the same point, and the other tumor was also killed.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	When suddenly, at about this time, the patient experienced an attack of gout in the affected area; and it began to swell as soon as the focus was pierced, and then started to ache.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called for the treatment of it, and treated it for a long time, and the swelling did not become solid.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you examined it from various causes, applied strong adhesive plasters, and examined the bone, and after a while passed to another bone; and you were too astonished to find that there was no bone in the stomach.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, you examined the swelling, extracted the bones from it, the female existing in the thighs in a certain position, and had been in that way for a long time, corrected with a small piece of bandage.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you did not think it strange, but rather knew that this is what is known and helps in this that the artificial bone is made to help in the cure of the patient.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the foot.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of ventilation used where it is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	 This is the form of compression used where the thighs are tied, which has two advantages at the extremities of two legs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this compression may be hidden under loose bandages, and is made of silk, gut, or threads of cloth.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the latitude of each thigh is twice the distance between two fingers and the margin of each thigh is one finger's length, and the longitude of each thigh is a palm and a half, and the latitude of each thigh is twice the distance between two fingers or a half hand.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional measures are inserted in the mouth of the foot so that it can be opened at those times when you measure the prescribed tightnesses.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	 Another form resembling the one that is hidden under loose bandages and has threads of silk, gut, or cloth threads.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	When joint pain is caused by hardness of the bones or cartilage, it is called a "fistula" if it is similar in shape to forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, in the extremities of the body, there are sometimes additional parts that are curved like palms, and the length of those parts is twice as long as the width, while the latitude is two degrees.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open it wider, you should place the female over the legs of the feet, opening it as much as possible between the thighs of the patient.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open the opening as much as possible with the instrument, as much as it fits the size of the mouth of the wound that you want to enter, according to the amount of force that you want to apply.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form in which the ancients described this:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of pushing it with which it is pushed by the foot:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of pulling it, by which the large head is counted:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps that have teeth at the end, sometimes, and some are made longer than forceps according to this form, sometimes, at the end of which there are teeth like those that are inserted and counted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The text you provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The text you provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is similar to Latin, It
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The text you provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is similar to Latin, Italian,
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The text you provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's a possible translation of the line:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	This sentence seems to be describing the shape of a thorn or a prickle, which has two ends. The "cap" referred to in this context is likely the pointed end of the thorn. So, the translation could be: 
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The translation of this sentence would be: "Two shapes of thorns." However, without more context,
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	This sentence seems to be discussing various instruments that have been exercised or practiced, and when the specific substances of those instruments are multiplied and prepared by the artificer, the quantity should be adjusted according to the operation and the number of men. A possible translation could be: "All the instruments that have been practiced or exercised, and when the specific substances of those instruments are multiplied and prepared by the artificer, the quantity should be adjusted according to the operation and the number of men.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	This sentence seems to be saying that if you do not complete the work on those instruments, the need for them is not justified. A possible translation could be: "And if you do not complete the work on those instruments, the need for them is not justified.
De extraccio de la segondina.	This sentence seems to be referring to the extraction of something from the second day. Without more context, it's
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second day is held, you must command the child to come to the malady that holds the will of the one who was held, and place your hand on the mouth of the one who was held and on their nose, and if it is possible, draw out the thorn. A possible translation could be: "When the second day arrives, you must command the child to come to the malady that holds the will of the one who was held, and place your hand on the mouth of the one who was held and on their nose, and if it is possible, draw out the thorn.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	When all of these herbs or some of them are submerged in water during the wave, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a canula made of banana leaves in the mouth of the patient, and hold it inside until the vapor comes to the concave part of the face.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then let it stand as they have said, and the second one will be taken out at high speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If the patient does not improve with this treatment, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil or ointment, and enter it into the womb and search for the second one, and when it is found, gently extract it piece by piece as recommended, and once it is found, carefully take out a small piece at a time so that the patient does not suffer from the force of the extraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Be careful to move your hands to the right and left, it is easier.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction, so that she obeys and escapes from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the patient is sewn up, we have already recommended this treatment for stunnation and for the disease of the wool.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If you do not forget all causes that have been recommended, you will keep in mind that it is not tiring over that in the iteration of abstraction, but rather that this is what is inserted into the mouth of the younger sister's thigh, and it is crushed and terafarmacon; fourth, that this will cause that to rot for a few days and then dissolve and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is wet, it is of the elevated male organ at the head and in the stomach, and that leads to the malady; and then it is given under fumigations and suitable for that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Many of the ancients have been treated with under-fumigations of nitre and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument by which the woman is under-fumigated, you must have the retention of menstruation and the second day.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It may be a sight or an error.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the end is gently placed under the couch and the wide end over the fire, and the under-fumigation is placed over the fire's breeze.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	You should hold that entrance which is consumed by that sub-smoking and continue another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the cure of the child's non-perforated buttocks.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	If the children have not perforated their buttocks and those are already simple and smooth,
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Advise the mother that she perforates it as said in the man; and if not, perforate it at the tip of the tail, and keep it away from touching the lacer.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place your hand over that intimate fur in the vagina and care for that as it is sensitive.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it is smooth, place your hand on the anus for a few days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if the smoothness of the buttocks has been consolidated by the consolidation of plague or cholera; then advise that this consolidation is firm, and keep it cured as said in the cure and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the cure of the fistulas that you eject.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	When the fistulas are drained in the area to the left of the crotch, those that are drained from the buttocks or in the space of a single part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And is it a fistula or motes?
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that moisture is old and runs from the white or fuzzy humidity, and some of these fistulas are seen to have penetrating parts.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating parts are known for water that is excreted and ventilated; and some use the crotch of excretion, and it is most used for those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are seen to have parts that enter the space penetrating into the vesica and into the meat of the thigh; and some of these penetrating parts enter the joint of the crotch and into the notch of the buttocks.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And what is known as a penetrating fistula in the buttocks and non-penetrating is that you place the thin end in the buttock, and enter it subtly with iron or steel in the fistula when it is not turgid.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If you sense a certain tightness, then enter slightly with your thumb or fingers into that spot where you feel the tightness or the horsehair.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel anything at all and do not proceed with any cause of diarrhea, vomiting, or wind, then know that it is non-penetrating, and return it to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the thigh, its meaning is to expel urine from that place and to prohibit it if that location is not solidified in medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and joint of pain in the circuit, you should know that the point enters here if there is no tightness in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that it causes a hole to be made at all times; and that it does not work in that medicine, nor is it solidified in the enguent.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that penetrate, it is not the cure for everything, and the cure of those is work and vigilance of the male doctors over which it is placed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	When there is no pain and it is not old, the cure is expected to be better if you follow my advice, and that which you have already tried.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	When the patient lies down on their back and raises their legs over the chest, the thighs are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and the attempt is made to inflate it or if it is in the turtuositat fistula, then know the location where the attempt is made.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that part of the patient's thigh is cold, then you should enter the said liquid in the wound.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the said liquid that the attempt has already been made to enter, or another that you feel between the said and the other part, then you know certainly that this is penetrating; and then do not worry about it, since it is not in the sanacio, as they have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they also say that this is healthy for men with cold feet.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which it is hoped to improve it, you should ignite the cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as it is said, and then introduce the burning into the fistula when it comes around the cold; and repeat this several times until you know that all those adjusted fistulized parts are already tight.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	When treating inflamed lumps that have been entered into the body, and when treating those that are causing or consolidating the flesh, and if it is cured, then it is; and if not, it will not be cured in a short time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the needle is inserted, and does not penetrate into that which is said to be in the anus, and between that and the needle which is made of flesh or gut, and sometimes the fistula opens at the surface of the abdomen, then you should dry the abdomen from the beginning of the fistula, and when the needle is dried, it should be placed inside the fistula as far as the opening in the location where the end of the needle reaches, and the needle should be freed and cauterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And you should clean those fistulized flesh that is assembled with catheter of penis and not caused by any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If there is any flow of pus that comes between you and your operation when you are opening those flesh, then you should dry the pus with an instrument that is cauterized with fire or acute medicine, for it is better to adjust the focus: so it is adhered to those adjusted flesh, and it is a cure for the exception of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And appropriately treat those that are swollen and inflamed on the border or within that location, and appropriately care for the wound with hard, tough flesh that ends up consolidated.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	When the medicines in which it is sterilized and excluded are restored, they are already healed and do not fear re-treatment.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	When the fistula has already entered the anus and is extended beyond its surface, then enter the medicine into the anus and inquire after it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you do not succeed and enter with your hand into the peritoneum or flesh, and it is directed towards the penetration, then do not operate on it but follow the second way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This is a complex sentence that seems to be describing the administration of medicine in three different ways: either by cauterization, if possible, to close the fistula; or by making an incision to allow the fistula to reabsorb and heal itself; or by using a sharp instrument to remove the pus from the fistula, if necessary, and then using another instrument to make a crust over the fistula. The goal is to restore the health of the entire plague as much as possible, and if the pus does not consolidate, to rinse the fistula with water at its opening in the anus, and allow it to heal through the malaute.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	When one enters the envelope of the wound or around it, and then enters the fistula that allows for the cavity's concavity to be achieved.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If one penetrates the margin of the buttock properly, then remove the wound from that point where you inserted the introducer; and extract the end of the wound and adjust the two ends as such, and stitch each, and leave it for a day or two, and when you see that the wound is inserted into the flesh, stitch it at the point where those flesh are inserted, which are between the two ends of the wound and that cause it to bend.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And afterwards, care for the plague when it is solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the entrance of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate, using whatever method you are prepared with, but not so deep as to cause the lizard to be inserted; and afterwards, when it is healed, stitch it at that point.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spatulum spinos is that which is sharpened at the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, therefore not inscribed as it is unnecessary, so it is used as many times as necessary.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of stitching in embolisms in which the sinew runs through the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Embolismuses are made with two needles, either between the thighs as if they were of carbs, or these are like fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those are small and large, and the sinew runs from those parts and is one, and through the thigh, and at the end of the foot, and at the ends of the limbs.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are more common are the thighs that are made according to the months of little moisture, of which the sinew runs through the water or a small piece of gut that is not continuous, and follows the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment of that which is given to the thigh is that you command the thigh to be closed in the leg that is stretched and that it expresses when the thigh has recovered and the embolicus appears to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	When you have finished and placed your hands on the patient's thighs, and then insert your fingers into those parts of their body that you need to examine.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the fingers are not flexible in those parts due to humidity or softness of those parts, then take those parts between your thumb and index finger, and gently press them with your thumb and index finger, and extract them from the skin, and insert them into the holes made in the skin, and sprinkle some powder on them, such as powdered chalk or powdered bone, so that they are adhering to the place of cauterization; or cauterize them immediately after the top of cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then care for those parts in the other cure, once they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the anus does not comply with evacuation, then you should cristerize the anus by cristerizing in the place where there is a small bite, and wash it with water that is in the bucket and that does not resist evacuation at all when the anus is full.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are due to the anus, then the cause is slight, and it is that you take those parts with your thighs, or take those parts with your fingers, insert them into the holes made in the skin, and then care for those parts with water that has been said after they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	When the wound is opened, the surgeon should administer suture with this hand: hold the needle firmly and insert it into the hole and extract the blood clots from the parts above, and make it penetrate again through the hole in the other part, and wrap the extrated blood clots around the part on the side of the hole, and stretch them latitudinally; and then tighten the suture on the strong structure, and make it not touch the hand and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all, and leave one undone and not the other, so that the excess of the sacred salt does not run from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place your hand over the buttocks and press them with oil or rosewater; and place your other hand on the cheek and order the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave that part undone; and when it is healed, cure those that are swollen or those that have been operated on that has become healthy.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Watery discharges occur due to the excess of the gut or due to the constraint of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	When those ancient remedies are not effective in that medicine, you should know that you must point with the punctum of spatum or with your own nail within which are wet humors and are hosted by those bones which have the cartilage pushed out, the which prohibits their consolidation; and then cure them when they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Do you stay with those when you see that the first is inside which is not sanded and is excoriated; and then cure them when they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	In the cure of gallstones, it is closed.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that aloes is closed and it is not so if you do not notice redon the color of the body resembling a claviel, and it is found in the whole body and particularly in the feet and toes, and then for that pain you must take the anament.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then you know that it is inscribed in this that is in the circuit of the lock, and it is held by the forces or by one, and it is eradicated from its root; and then cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, make a point on the following that is preceded by the capital in the preceding sentence.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A few cases of warts are small, rough, round, and deep fistulas on the surface of the skin, and many children's veins run through them.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment of the wart is that you extend and insert it, or that you stretch it with what is inside or with what is outside the box.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, make a point as they have said, either with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the warts and non-warts have been removed with the instrument that you say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A few ants are small, rough, or gross fistulas on the surface of the skin that extend to the preon, and when the wart atrophies in that appearance, it is like a bug bite and is cut around the area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment of the wart is that you take a needle of acacia or of voltor, and it is strong, and place it on the ant within which you contain the circle of the needle of the parts of the wart; and then rotate your hand with the needle as it is in the circuit of the ant, and remove it from the preon of the flesh, and eradicate the ant from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you want, make a cannula of iron or steel according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part of the cannula that is traced should be made with subtlety, not pierced, wrapped over it so that the learning of that part is blunted and the bend of that part is made smooth.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If you want to cauterize the ant with the following method according to the cauterization of the tail in the cauterization of the caput:
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of the instruments that are administered to give cristeri.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some veins are made of silver or lead or melted or hammered; and some veins are made of those instruments small and large according to those that are administered, which is the one that is administered in the cure of small children's feet; and of that of those whose ends are rough or sharp, the cristeri of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few cristeri:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula of that part in which the bag is attached is wide according to this manner; and in that distinction, at that time, the bag is attached in different ways.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	At the extremity of the patient's leg, which is inserted into the anus, it may be dark (not cut) but closed by a hedgehog, later advanced with subtlety; and in one of the legs there are two tracts, and in the other side a single track, and the width of the track follows the coarseness of the hairs and is large at the ends.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	If the bag in which the medicines for the animal's bladder or lamb's wool are placed is large, and the mouth of the bag is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	If it is perforated by many tracts that revolve around; and if the space it contains between the tracts is the largest of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	If you enter into those tracts that are deep and narrow, or wander around them; and adjust the bag accordingly; and when it is placed in that bag, it should be stretched at the top of the cristae between two distinct points that are far apart, and for each track, the quality of the cristae should be as good as possible; and make sure you do not have too much tail or too much fringe.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	1. Then place the patient's limbs on the table, raise their limbs to their chest, and place a pillow under their head; and then apply ointment or oil of almond, albumen of honey, or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and then enter that in the belly with ease, and the midwife takes the bag and expresses that amass more and seems more vehemence as it is evacuated through the entire intestine that is in the cistern; and then remove the cistern and the patient's limbs from the table.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine fails to subdue it, hold on to it as much as possible; and if it sleeps for a whole night, it will be less severe in the morning.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you criminalize that in the cures of stomach ailments and the subsidence of the knee, then you should repeat the cauterization as soon as it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the buttocks there are hemorrhoids or varicose veins, then you should be a strict and gentle doctor, among the doctors that the children's criteria are set.
De curacio de las plaguas.	In the cure of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And you have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues that it was appropriate for the free, and you say that the cure of those is equal to the medicine according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, say that the plagues are diverse according to what they are painful and according to the place where the plaques are caught.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which you feel that the plagues are painful are as common as gout, or scarlet fever or cotton wool, or percussion, or forceps, or sewing, or similar to those of the causes of motion.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	When plagues occur in the parts of the body that are subject to them as much as the head, neck, chest, stomach, and limbs, it seems.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	When you are recommending the cure for some diseases based on that reasoning and rule applied to other diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you begin with the simple headaches, where the reminder of the compounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, when you have a simple headache that is not fractured, you should consider: if it is due to urinary stones or appearance, and the pelvis has already been drained, and the headache is great and there are fears about the bad outcome of the operation for anesthesia, you should touch the head as much as possible, and do not delay; and extract from the side of the sand, according to the amount of virtue of the patient if there is no other cause that prohibits fleubotomy, especially if the sand comes from the disease is few.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if the fleubotomy is from the opposite side of the diseased part; and pay attention to the anus and vagina and large ganglions.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If during the menstruation you forbid any cause, you should be less hungry and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And rest over the wound, if it happens to be an abscess, cut into it with a sharp knife, and let blood flow out or insert a stiptic pin.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure it is an abscess, rest over the wound, if it is recently formed and the air has not changed, use the powder that I recommend for a small amount.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed, rest over the wound until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or was caused by an injury and not properly fitted, and the lips of the patient are not adjusted to the puzzles, adjust those sutures according to the recommendation of the sutures you recommend.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already been exposed to the bone and bone, and there is no retention of the patient except for a small suspensor, insert that and apply appropriate treatment to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and order the thigh to be cut into slices where it is gnawed: caps and form knots and similar to them, within which it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If you find putrefaction in the bone and it does not adhere to the bone, then you should inject all of this ointment and apply it, and then care for it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	When these plagues affect an artery or vein that carries blood from the sinus, and are not treated by physicians, you should inquire about the artery, and if it is not closed, you should close it with a point at the site where it is not closed, or tie it there; and if this causes discomfort as they have said, you should cauterize at the site where it is closed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these plagues are simple and small, the cause of them is the softening; I do not know if you have powdered over those, but that powder becomes compact and changes the air in those places.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The recipe for the powder is as follows: take one part of ensemberg, one part of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished particles; mix them all together and grind them, and when they are filled, bind them with good construction over that place, and coagulate the sanguine.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tightly wrap that part with the powder and do not let it slide while it is not set, for it will not be effective if the medicine is inside when it is cured.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	When alone, one makes a cut with a cautery, when there is no one present and no doctor's assistance.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	This operation is already performed in the most serious cases when it is necessary to place it over them and make them straight, and recent pains that have not altered the air of the patient are considered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has altered it, and especially during summer, you will not be able to see this powder in its position, nor will it cure those who have said that you should pause over those engaged in digestion, or over those pores of the other water and honey that enters when cooked; and it will cure those in another cure when they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you happen to have a fracture of the bone in the foot and it is small, you should extract this with your hand.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will tell you the cure for fractures of the head in what is infected.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the colic pains.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If you happen to have a pain in the colon, there will be no difference in treatment, and between the headache when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the collar or artery are already cut or compressed, then if it is the case that there is pain in that part, it is not advisable to perform surgery on that area, but rather to avoid surgery and treat the pain with a cooling remedy, as indicated by the physician and similar to what is done for other parts of the body.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And if you do not place your hand on the plague for any cause of all this discharge, that the substance of the nerves is discharged and the continuation of it is in the brain, which is pushed away from all parts of the body.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is treated with unnatural medicines, then how the water is washed away, there is some infusion in rose oil or not-rose oil, and when the water is washed away and the other parts are washed with this method, and they become moist, it is found to be beneficial.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the plague is large, then you should administer a suture or close the lips of it, and afterwards cure that with powdered medicine as soon as it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	When the plague is deep or occurs in the lower part of the small intestine, it is necessary to perforate that in its location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	When in the plague an artery is already inserted and a flux of blood occurs, it is necessary to separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if it causes pain to you.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	When the spine of the gallbladder has already been inserted and the veins of the chest are saved, it is necessary to adjust the lips of the abdomen over the gallbladder's neck without touching that; equally as much as that and reduce it over its natural figure, and stretch it decently, and let it be like that for a while; and cure it in the ways in which it is stiptic and excited in those in which it is inflamed and painful.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	When the plague is already in the bones and causes pain, it is necessary to perforate that, and if in it there are fragments of them, extract all that you can from them; and what is not apparent to you, let it be known to you when the plague is cured, and it should be separated and the eggshell of it should be removed.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the plague is recent, you should sprinkle powder on that powder which you have recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the plague there is an abscess, you should treat that with the same medicine that comes to mind in the capital city.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the colon or similar ones that occur between the spines and are caused by spasma, am costel, am lansa, or am semblants.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If there is percussion of lansa or cotel, and sometimes of the depth, you should consider if the plague has ventritis when the thighs are enlarged; you know that the plague is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in it there is no depth and the plague is recent in the capital city, you should pause in it for the first hour of powder, and do not strain that because it is not the sand retained in the depth of it and that returns to the heart and that does not disturb the thighs, but pause in it for a while, and desire that those wounds heal according to what has been seen on that day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the wound is not at your disposal, you must pause in the orifice of the plague cot to prevent this from happening due to humidity; and make the thigh lie over the plague so that it runs through the wound that is adjusted in it.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the wound has been open for three days or more and there have been no spasms, tremors of the heart, or strictures of the throat, and sometimes other good positions of the patient, you know that the plague is safe; and then cure that part with care and the other when it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the cure of the patient is postponed and there has been much time to open it, you know that a fistula has already been made; then cure that part for the sake of the capital head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the wound is due to compression of gas or water, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or thigh, you cure that part according to what is previously prescribed by suturing if it is large, or by powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been an inflammation in the bones and you have not yet opened the wound, you tighten the plague and cut to extract those pus, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	When they are not separated, you should cleanse the wounds that are likely to become infected, as the extraction of these is difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And from other diseases that may occur in other parts, the treatment in this case is the same as what has been said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the diseases of the stomach.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, or small, or intermittent.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great ones, some worms or nerves of the intestine are felt, for which an insertion of them is made and the suture of them is made to be very tight and very loose.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is difficult to make with another hand, and if it is found that the reduction of them is difficult, then do not hesitate to make the insertion of them in your place as soon as possible, because it is pressed and engorged so that the intestine's entrance is difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And the better disruption is intermittent, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the special cases mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	You know that a stitch of the belly is followed by four fingers, and less common stitches are those that correspond to stitches of other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two of the same sutures are used for other plagues, but not for the abdominal suture.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you every exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the plague is small and is caused by any cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then you are in one of two hands: either due to the disruption of the rupture as they have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when it is inflamed, you know that you must soak that in a damp cloth made of a mixture of water and herbs such as ginger, turmeric, and pepper, and apply it to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some people have seen that it has improved in the water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation being resolved, you hydrate the intestine with water in which it is cut at the highest and lowest points, so that the intestinal cord is eased a little due to its few causes.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the pain is not relieved by this treatment, then divide the disruption with a small instrument that has not been used on inflamed areas.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first source sentence translates to: "The first and most important treatment is when it is not cut, and there is no need for extraction or removal.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body,
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	2. and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	3. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	4. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	5. And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then pause your attention and consideration for a moment to ensure that the part where the pain is located is not higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	6. And it is necessary to administer this remedy in both large and small joint pain.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	7. And in small joint pain, stop the remedy you have prepared, and apply it to your most affected areas, holding the medicine with your hands and adjusting the sutures as needed, and if necessary, cut the thread that caused the wound.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture method: one that grasps the cord, or according to the number of the amplitude of the wound; and releases at the end of the disruption of this annular ring, and stretches the cord one, another that you do not make a knot in the ends of the chain, other ends of the cipher that is left behind the chain of the parts of the dentists, entering that it penetrates from that part; and you have already added the ends of the chain and the ends of the cipher, and so you make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And you should tighten the double thread in the circuit of the cord, and some watches of parts, and add the labia and the plague by adding the descent; and release the size of this and put another cord in that, and link this as it is with the first cord; and do not stop until it is necessary to close all the contraction of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the threads are more slender between coarse and subtlety, four of the slender threads make light incisions in the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to enter into the chain, and therefore for this reason it is necessary that they be more slender and thinner.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	The following sentence is from the medieval medical treatise:
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	When the wound is not prolonged with stitches so that the abscess is not prevented from consolidation,
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not pierce the thigh; and place your hand over the dried powdered sutures that hold the ends of the needles; and leave them as you know that the abscess has solidified.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of sutures with needles in the hand are suitable for small abscesses, which have enough needles or threads or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is as follows: and it is that you administer through the suture the four ends, from the codena to the doas extremitatz of the cipher, in a veguada, with an agulha in which there is a fiel envolopat engual in subtilitat and grosseza.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle of that particular part of the metal from which it began, so that the fiel returns to the subjacent pus part of the abscess, so that the suture is the second suture of drap am the quality of which the draps are strengthened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	When you pause between each stitch, measure the size of the given cloth.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitch is sewn by men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And this stitch is sewn with care, as it was used to treat a man who had been poisoned in the abdomen, and the wound was larger than a palm, and was located around two palms of the intestine, and there was a disruption in the intestine; and then you reduced that part which the intestine had swollen due to the poison for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and it was treated and became healthy; and after that, it remained in good condition for several years, and was discussed in its proper places.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had failed to heal those who were not healthy; and by miracle, if you did not cure that man, it was because there was no medicine in the place where the wound was located, and only two veins were cut each day and frequent drinking of honey water inside the fire became sick; but then the fire became healthy.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	When there are two kinds of suture mentioned in a certain narrative of Paradise, it means that there are two types of stitches being discussed.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And do you mean the suture of the umbilicus, and insert the needle at the end of the intestine into the intestine?
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, when the needle pierces the umbilicus and the surrounding muscles according to the correct method and over the entire length, and leaves the end of the caecum where you inserted the needle; and then, insert the other end of the intestinal hole into the other end of the hand.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And if you have made that piercing, then you will make another piercing in the other end of the hand's extremity of the intestine; and leave the end of the caecum that is in this wound, and insert the needle into the other end of the intestinal hole.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And then, insert the needle into that piercing which you made in the caecum where it is located, and continue to pierce until the entire hand is pierced.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	When this side of the meatus is opened and the finger is placed at the extremity that is opposite to the urethra, extract the bead of the urchin which penetrates, and return it to that urchin and close the extremity of the urethra that is on this side; and extract that from the urchin which is part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make another incision and another, and make another incision within what you have removed that follows according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this suture is that you cut the suture of the perichondrium which cuts the cartilage, in other words that you cut the urethra one incision from the extremity of the urchin, and that you see another incision within what is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second suture of the same kind is that which Gualia describes, and this is for the purpose of the urethra and according to it, you cut that second semilune which the physicians cut in that part, in other words that they add all the parts to their own part according to nature; and they apply the end of another to the other end of the mirror and that is according to what I advised you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have inserted the needle into the end of the arm opposite to your hand, and it has pierced through to the bone in that part, and you see two ends of the socket; then revolve the needle and make it pierce from the bone to the finger through both ends of the socket.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then revolve each one and make it pierce through the end of the finger into the end of the thigh in two opposite parts of the arm that are not in the same direction as the lance.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This suture is better than common sutures, and is the one that was previously remembered.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Guillaume (Guy).
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	If they could have told you, the abdominal suture was corrected by two needles, so that you enter through each one at a different point, and then begin with the insertion of your needle according to the one you must use, and make it pierce through the other abdomen according to the sutures of those that hold the teeth together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when the disruption occurs in your abdominal location, the suture of the belly is difficult to do compared to other abdominal locations.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	When the symptoms of a plague are judged by other plagues, it means that the symptoms of one disease are mistaken for those of another.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	When this occurs when you can obtain the plague recently from the devil, and reduce the intestines and abdomen appropriately, then place your hand over that powdered concoction.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place your hand over that which you find presently when urine is hard and causes stones in the bladder, and they are solid and mirrored; and treat that illness as the treatment of other plagues when it is cured.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have access to medicines, place your hand over that which you know as the bladder, because it begins to swell, and change the direction of those two veins in the day, according to what you know and teach, when the plague is cured, so you will not need another medicine in the meantime when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may spread to the main members, then cover that which you submerge in wool with oil of temple quality, or in red oil, and place that in the circuit of the loci which are between the ankles and in front of the shoulders.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then four measures should be taken at once, namely, to apply the black stiptic to that area, and especially if perforation has occurred in the intestine and exitus penetrates into the cavity of the abdomen.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You know that the treatment for a large intestine is different from that for small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is difficult to treat the intestine called "gut" that does not receive plague from the cage because of its great number of veins, its large size, its subtlety in texture, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If that is what you are doing from the plague, then that is the sheet, and you will achieve that secondly by reducing the intestines' engagement with each other.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed through that space and you have already turned or blackened it, then apply what you strength to that area over the one that is denigrated by the flow of scent, because there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	When you insert the gout, that is another limb, and pause the two ends of the foot dropper outside the plague forum, so that above your hand, the attraction of the plague requires the tension of the fabric and the emission of the bile from the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering the plagues when they happen in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because you see that which was previously plague-stricken in the lower abdomen by percussion of a staff and was the plague of the part second from the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and it was an example of the management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And if you continue the cure even if it was not confided in the sanction of the patient, then stop subtly that which focuses on the health of the patient and the location is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you put that I saw the location was consolidated, then over the thighs that you approach about the accident of mal in the lower abdomen; and do not encounter anyone for that mal accident and rams in their disposed mouths eating and drinking, and then enter into bath and is exercised in your saying.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	When an abscess forms in the intestine and is small, it is customary to treat it with this method: and you should take large needles; and adjust the lips of the abscess and place a needle on those that have opened over the lips of the abscess; then when you press over them and tighten your mouth, the head of the needle will adhere and will not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then pause another fever after the first one, and do not stop here to make as many fevers as necessary for the whole abscess.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And reduce that and close the abscess; and remove those that are attached inside the intestine as soon as the intestine is healed; and do not cause harm to the thighs.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the abscess is hidden in a subtle thing that is made of intestine, which is more like a needle; and you should take the end of these intestinal threads, and it must be empty, and close the end of that intestinal thread with your finger, envelop it, and enter that thread into needles and cause disruption to that abscess, and reduce it.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This manifold suture is not merely a second chance of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is large and wide, and if it occurs in one of the intestines' subtle parts, then many things cannot be handled without subtlety, and it cannot be cured by a single remedy.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Regarding the treatment of wounds and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that all plague and gangrene when they become infected and are left untreated in ancient times, and if an ulcer is formed, it does not heal and the limb remains swollen for a long time and does not separate, in any member it is universally called a fistula and we call it that pus.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, according to truth, is a hard, white, and painless one, which does not cause pain or contract like pain; and for this reason it is called that abscess, namely pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in a wet fistula, the limb swells; and very soon if it is wet, it separates in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	When some of this moisture is moved, it is few, it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	When I have already said in the division, that all ulcers which are not cured and do not occur in the naked flesh, are not equal to one of these causes: of which one is due to a lack of cure in the body; or due to malice of the body; or due to something between the body and the lips that is hard and not of natural origin; or due to watery reading; or due to that ulcer itself being poisonous and the matter that is mixed with it being of bad quality; or due to the medicine being inappropriate for the cure of the body; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is a pestilence; or due to the property of the region as in Saragossa, where it is difficult to digest the diseases, and it is delayed in the treatment of apostema by nature; or due to something in it, or bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all those causes, and the symptoms of those and the cure of them in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	When you cut so that you can know the cure for the fistula which is made by way of operation, it is called proper surgery.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	You know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; four of those are fistulas that reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the bladder, or the vesica, or to any part of the costal cartilages, or to any part of the spine of the two, or to any part of the joints composed of the tailbone and the foot; and those that bring proximity to the main member and its resemblance.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And for those of these fistulas that are followed by this method it is one of the difficultly treatable diseases, and does not receive cure, and occupation is to that which is worked on and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas has a depth that does not reach those places that was said, and you hope and trust in the cure of it, and want to know its nature, then try to open it with a knife or with iron, and if the fistula is following correctly, and question that about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	When the fistula is twisted, investigate that which is gently pulled underneath, for four pulses of subtle force are needed to lift the weight of the heart and curve the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has not been harmed, it is not possible for you to know what is intended about this matter.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Cristen the wound with your own wound, for the humidity through which you cleave that wound must also be applied to the other wounds and curved.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And if you inquire carefully, according to which hand you are able to recognize whether you have bones or nerves, and the cavity of the long or short fistula, or is a fistula that has been harmed by your wound and is on it all the strength of your fortitude, the strength of your endurance, the which endures the pain, and the compression of the foot over the location, and seeming signs and causes accidents to the hernia.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have been aware of all those causes, you will see the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula or in its location long, far from the joint, or from nerves, or from artery, or from vein, or from one of the loci which you have and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula after it is said to be caused by the narcotic of the patient, and take note that it is in that filtration and of corrupt parts, and that it was born in the slaughterhouse of the flesh or of the semblance, and cure that part which is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long depth and follows the rectum, you should cover it as deeply as possible in the prepuce as much as you can, and modify all of its corrupt parts; and administer enveloped air bubbles in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And use some of the acute medicine that damages all that is within the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And restore those that generate healthy flesh inside when it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize that according to what has been recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is known and you must certify this to the patient, then investigate this and dry that which has been recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or primary limb as they have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bones are discovered and found to be corrupt or blackened, you should immediately treat that part where the corruption is located; and properly care for that area as soon as it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If the wound is not healthy and does not heal as it should, you know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of corruption; and then you discover over it and with great care make the reason for the wound and the mundification of the flesh according to the same fortalest tie, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good; but if not, you know that the corruption is in the deep depth of the heart, which has not been able to overcome it, and then it is not enough for you to merely relieve it, but you must also eliminate it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bones are corrupted, or you can remove it, you know that you must use fine forceps with which you can do this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if those bones are corrupted, you make the extraction of all of them and of those that do not have any cause due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if you have any contradiction to any cause of the humors, and in them there is no fear or error, you insert those limbs or tendons where they are, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you do not have preparation for your bones, place a layer of wet cloth over the area where it needs to be moistened, and insert it into the space that is inside the bones of the limbs and joints, and keep the wetness from drying out, and secure the cut you made in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear, place your hand over the cotton that is submerged in olive oil or Egyptian angustment or in a container of green herbs, when it is moistened and the limbs are separated from the ablation, and the bones are attached to the joints.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a great bone that is like the bone of the ham or thigh or similar, and that part of the bone becomes rotten so quickly, then you should cut off that part as much as possible underneath where it is left, and then restore the moisture.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If it is a great part of the bone that becomes rotten and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then you should make the necessary cut to close that and that total, and then cure that inside where the corruption is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	I advise you to go to a man in his thighs so that you can pause there and assist over my operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man in his early forties suffered from pain in his thigh, and the matter of the matter was that there was inflammation in the femoral region, which was pervading the thigh, and it was a large case of appendicitis, and there was no external cause for this.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	When the focus extends the time because of the error of the physicians who entered the aposteme, and the matter moves, and the focus's fire is paused between the cavity that the fistula was made, and points are made on those orifices which all get wetted with excrement and the humidity of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And after many years, the care of physicians was around two hands, and the focus did not know about it in the art, but when you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the fistula and the matters that came from it those orifices for a great body; and the body of that man was entirely dry and the color of it was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then you introduced the tent into one of those orifices and it reached the os.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then you and I examined all those orifices and found that they reached the parts of the fistula.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then you showed me and covered over one of those orifices and entered it after describing a part of the os, and I found that part corrupted and already twisted and terrible and corrupted; and it was already corrupted a part of the fistula when it had penetrated into the meso.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	When I had discovered and prepared this remedy for my own discovery, I would share it with you.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And if you were not in the bones but only in that corruption which I have abandoned and hidden, and you had already fallen.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then wait for the restoration of the plague by long-term, consolidating medicine, but it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you continue to discover and explore the bones secondarily after the first discovery, and you continue to find corruption in the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I would share with you what appears to be that corruption, and then you should perform the cure of it and restore it, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discovered another view and did not stop inserting the bones one by one particularly, and you performed the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I inserted my palm around it, extracted some from its marrow, and then restored it with medicine, and it became slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to repeat the operation of its cutting and sectioning except for the disposition of the flesh and for the lack of tolerance of the patient and the poverty of his death, which caused an accident in all hours due to superfluity of evacuation without proper sinus.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	This is a medical treatise that discusses various medical procedures and treatments in a medieval context. Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If you are in the chest and it is inflamed, then cover that second hand with your other hand: and that is when you pull and stretch that at the extremity of that inflamed part, and command to extend that on the side of the first one; and cut that ligament with a sharp knife from the first one; and place that ligament over the flesh that you have just exposed, and extend the incision so that it presses the flesh at the parts you have exposed, and you will discover the flesh on the location that you want to suture so that the suture does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then pause for a moment and place your hand on the opposite side of the chest, as when you are doing this it is not forbidden to suture if the rotten flesh does not succeed.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover that the suture is over the rotten part little by little, as when it is in the concavity of the rotting bone and does not appear on its surface sensation, and force the suture to be seen again.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bones are rotten and not inflamed, then continue to another part of the other, and the rotting is in the same place or in a different part, then you will discover the flesh of all parts; and pause for a moment, and suture that of the first part where the rotting is inside when the other part suture is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	When the grip is on the spot of corruption, it is a small one, as they have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the corruption is in the joint, insert your hand into that corrupted joint, and secure the bones that continue from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If the corruption is in the continuation of several joints, you will not be in that reason but rather in error.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If the corruption is in the shoulder of the arm or foot, it is very difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in the part that appears to you, and cut out that, and mend it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and make sure it is rightly corrected for you, when it does not oppose you to veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You know what are the incisions and the grips to insert these bones are, according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their size, and their subtlety and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you prepare for the whole species of operation instrument convenient for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You know that this operation means for you on the specific of the instrument that you ask for; when you have great skill and long study, and deep knowledge of the hands of this art, and testimony of the hands of diseases, where laborers already have you those which are convenient for you from the stitches to the whole disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you know that in the end of this capital, you form the number of the instruments which you will use according to their simplicity and those which you will process for your prohibition, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of rays:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray should be according to the form of the star-shaped lock cap, and its points should be according to the form of the steel points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it does not seem otherwise that they are confricated with the caps of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	The given text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, It
Forma de razori menor:	The first source sentence to translate is: "Forma de razori major dels autres
Forma de razori lat:	The translation of the first source sentence is: "Form of the major razor on others
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The translation of the second source sentence is: "Form of a less severe wound is when it is an arc of the point of the nail with its sharpness of iron, and the member of the foot is less painful.
Forma de lu:	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	It appears that the text you've provided is not in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Instead, it
Forma de razori autra subtil:	looks like it's written in an ancient form of Latin or a made-up language. However, I
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	can still attempt to provide a translation based on the context and the structure of the sentence. Here's my best guess:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The first source sentence is not provided in the text you've given. However, I can help you translate the subsequent sentences based on the context you've provided.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	The translation of "Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses" is: "Form of the knife that cuts the bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	The translation of "Forma de inscisori auttra minor" is: "Form of another smaller knife
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The translation of "Forma de un auttra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:" is: "This form of another knife resembles a ray, and its end is shaped like this, and it is displayed in several locations in the joint of the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	The translation of "Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:" is: "This form of ray corresponds to the ratio of that which is perforated by the bones.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The translation of "E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat" is: "And its end is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	The translation of "E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras" is: "And it is made of Indian steel, and seems to cover all the causes that have been said about knives, forks, and scissors.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	When dealing with the joints and the tightening of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The corruption can be either intrinsic or extrinsic, and when you have treated the member with medicine, but the medicine does not cure, sometimes the member that does not feel any cause of corruption, it is necessary to insert the member in that place where the corruption is more serious, so that the evacuating part of the wound can be removed, to prevent further damage or malice that may cause more harm to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black inside because it is what burns, or it can be placed properly at the end where the wound enters that penetrates into that member which you see and that grasps all the body; and then you will know how to open that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And if it seems that the corruption is caused by a blow from some venomous causes such as from the sting of a scorpion or from a viper or from a nettle and similar,
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the blow is at the end of that, you should insert the member and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter the wound.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	When it comes to the matter of entering the body, if you are able to access the waist, then insert your hand into that of the abdomen, and do not leave any space for corruption to enter as you grasp the abdomen of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If you cannot reach the abdomen, then insert your hand into the arm through the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If corruption passes and you surround the joint with your hand, then that is the death of the body; and managing another cause or another in treatment is an increase in virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	If corruption occurs on the foot when it is said that it occurs on the foot, then you should insert your hand into it at one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you grasp the heel of the foot, then you should insert your hand into the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If you can enter the joint, then insert your hand into the thigh bone.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has already spread over the joint, then in it there is no hope but discharge and death of the body.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The means of inserting the member or closing it is that you stretch the ligament at the part where you want to insert it, and stretch another ligament over the location; and extend the ministry one ligament to the parts ahead, and extend another ligament in its place; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments, and enter it if it is discovered completely in the flesh; and keep it in place.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	When it is necessary to cover the patient's entire body with clothing that does not touch the wound at the anus and the surrounding area, and when it comes to the anal injury adjusted and inflamed, apply a poultice of oak bark.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If the wound oozes when you work on it, then cauterize the wound firmly or place some powder to restrain the discharge; and return to your treatment as soon as it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply the affected member with the appropriate herb, and treat it within the time that it becomes healthy.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I advise you to go to a doctor in the city, this accident which I told you and which I also recommended to you, is the one that is common in the city, adjusted to the assembly of combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption first appears in the city when you have to treat all the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares for his own wounds that are close to the member with great speed because of the pain and the inflammation of the part, and he immediately goes to the joint, and the focus becomes healthy.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	This text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's a line-by-line translation of the given source sentence:
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	When I was young, and my mind was not yet shaped by the world of medicine, I perceived that this superfluity, which is now called gout, would be useful in the treatment of many diseases, particularly those of the body; and it has proven to be useful and has begun to be used in other ways.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the appetite made me insert the belly of the patient, and I did not want to hope for the repercussion of that superfluity, and less that you must fear the insertion of the belly of the patient, which was overcome by fatigue.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	I thought that my belly would burst, it returned to its place and I returned to him that the man had prepared and inserted his belly completely, and he was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not written this account except for its utility in this matter, which is an assistant on this disease, and it has a significant meaning and follows the same.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	For the cure of the limbs and the quality of the cluttering with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an eczema occurs on the sharp members of the body, and the space of the eczema is extended within it because it collects filth, and it is torn and perforated, and the dirt is removed from it, and the location is cleaned as if it were fresh, and the stitching that was done on it is done subtly, and no corruption is found in it, and it is not pressed on the bone or nerve or limb, it is called a wound, and it is not considered a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	When however the space is extended within which corruption presses upon some member, it is called a fistula and does not close.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The cure for it is to insert the needle at that point where it rotates, and especially when it becomes more delicate and thin, like a needle, and comfortable so as not to stick to the place of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the needle adheres and that this corruption will not be achieved by following consequence, and if there is any face in the hole, then treat that with an antiseptic.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And do you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that you use is of a strong odor, then you disinfect that medicine Egyptian which is of oil and vinegar and receives parts engulfed in parts, and they are adjusted on a vessel, and they are covered over the face where the medicine comes into contact with a specific part of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and disinfect that sinus, and tighten the outlet of it, and place the medicine in it for the number of hours that is required.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And take away that precious part; and do this for several days until the sinus is softened and the skin is moistened.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And if some gallstones are presented to you in ash, when you are not able to present this medicine; and that is, you take the ash of fire, and put it over the water; and then close that and cystealize it within that when you think that this sinus has been softened.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the thigh does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash of fire, then close that water and mix honey with a little of the mesclat ziniar, and close that water again and mix it with honey mixed with a little of the mesclat ziniar, and mix four parts of honey with one part of mesclat ziniar, because it is for cleaning and washing, and then the sine adheres to the skin, especially when there is excessive stupidity and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this to some gallstones and you think that the sinus has been moistened, then close that water and mix honey with the water that makes the flesh softer in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	It is necessary to take some ointment and dissolve that rose oil with stiptic; or to mix it with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the orifice of the sinus is narrow and not received by the canula of the clister, then you should widen that am slightly at a time, and place it in the covered envelope of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment when it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the orifice is wide, then you should add the labia of the am sutura and reduce the amount in which the clister is added to it.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the orifice of the sinus is elevated at its parts and the brace runs into a basal location where it can pass through, then you should dry that in the basin closest to it so that the brace does not get stuck in the sinus cavity. When the brace is cut at the end of the generated flesh, it will pass through easily.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the bone of the basin according to your wish, then you should perforate that member in the preparation for which the sinus is being cut slightly according to what you see and which is not held in any way by the brace.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	When you have taken some solid remedies that are placed on the correct part of the sinew in order to extend those over the cloth for that which you wish to,
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	When the cloth is as large as possible to allow for communication of all the sinuses; and then insert an instrument in the left side of the sinus orifice a few centimeters into the sinus; and then extend over other drapes of the patient's legs according to the quantity of the instrument, and place it over that per long-term position of the sinus orifice so that the tension of the bracelet of the patient is not held by the large drapes alone for a few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When one is over the orifice of the sinus, which remains closed for the entire hour due to the fact that it is adjusted in the part of the brace.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And how do you know if the pain from the brace is due to food or not?
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And do you also consider the location of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is affected by inflammation.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in that manner, and you see the material that was applied over the orifice of the sinus has adhered, or if it does not adhere properly, how do you hold it in place or change it on the next day, and when you remove the plaster, how do you change the drap and renovate the incision.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if the sinus has enough space and subtle viruses, you will not despair of its adherence, for the treatment of the patient is appropriate, for those who have a slow generation of flesh in those wounds, and for those who have contrary ones.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinew takes three days to become swollen and hard, you should know that it does not adhere; and if the sinew's adhesion is delayed and is the cause of prolongation, you should adjust it in drying by the means of medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they become like leather when adjusted due to the excessive addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The greater the disease is, the more you take from the excess of dyafinicon and it becomes dissolved in olive oil, and it is over the wound that you apply the antic engual in its substance, and you comfort that part with it, and use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And if you seem to have an abscess, when there is no swelling, the excess of dyafinicon melts when it is pressed, and you use that; or if you take mirra and aloe and twist it, and spread it over the mel when it is heated, and put it on the sinu; and put the mel that has been pressed when it is heated, and powdered over drap and stretch it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	When certain remedies are administered in the long-term practice of aristology, and made from lily of the valley (and the lily of the valley), oats, and centaury, and used as they are or adjusted, picked and crushed, and powdered over the meal which I have recommended; and it is applied to the body.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the vein is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, you know that corruption has settled in the pre-on of the patient, and you have already made an investigation in the bones or in other hard members or ligaments; then, with this curative incision, do as it is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	After a surgical operation on the finger nails and the addition of a digit cut and a section,
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The finger nail is affected by the one that does not leave the tip of the thumb or toe, and it is less affected in the other toes, and when it is prolonged and its cure is not well, or it is postponed due to a cauterization, or it is corrupted, and it gets infected inside when the nail corrodes the skin, and much of it becomes corrupted, and much of it permeates the corruption to the bone that has the smell of decayed matter, and the end of the toe is made, and its color turns black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that power that has been said in the division and does not satisfy your cure, you know that you must cut off the entire superfluity that is growing on the nail and make a cauterization on the plagla as it is said, because the cauterization is not always effective.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bones are hard and the joints are healthy, and the joints of the joints want to compress the parts of the limbs, and they begin to push and pull on that, you should put your thumb and index finger on the point where you pierced the joint, and press and insert it into that point, and then pull it out and insert it into the same joint that you pierced, and press and insert it into the same joint with ease, and stop when the pain is completely relieved; and apply this treatment to the affected area.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	When corruption has already settled in the bones, you should cover the affected bone and its surroundings, as no time is ever cured if corruption has settled in that bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the corrosion and corrupting appear in that place, then you should insert it into one of the noses according to which memory is prescribed, and carefully care for it within that part which is healthy.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	When there is pain in the thigh at the end of a blow or strike, and the pain is very intense, you should cut away the flesh around the thigh, and then clean the wound with water that has been mixed with vinegar and cut across the grain, and keep the wound from getting infected by the flesh that is still attached to the thigh, so that when you later cause pain in the same place, it will not be due to excessive flesh in that location; and then care for that area with what is suitable for reducing pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	If it is too tight, which is common in many men, too much flesh is present, and too much bone is present, or too much fat.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	If the joint is made of flesh, or if its origin is in fleshy parts, rather than in bones.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	If that which is made of flesh is not harmful, but the one that is made of joints is harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are made of flesh, the cut is easier, and you must make the cut with water that has been mixed with vinegar.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	When someone is born with joint pain in that particular part of the body, the treatment is difficult; therefore, it is important to protect it from further harm.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the one who is not born from this, cover that you inscribed at the beginning of the flesh of the other in the bone, and approximately press with one of those convenient ones here, and carefully attend to what is inside that is healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More consolidation that accumulates between those motions or by birth of the man who has not yet been born, or by consolidation of plague or combustion of fire, or by appearance, therefore cover that success to that consolidation within which those return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And pause between them the draps of the infiltrated fluids in rose oil to prevent them from becoming consolidated too soon, and separate between them or pause between them a thin layer of subtle plomb entering which is consolidated after that covers.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And if there is an appearance of consolidation in some parts of the flesh, then you dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and is convenient for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From inscription of veins, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	The first source sentence translates to: "Varicose veins are similar to the others, and they are wrapped in large, full of superfluous melancholic blood vessels that flow through the limbs of the body, and the most common occurrence is in the legs, and especially in the legs of itinerant workers and laborers and those who wear clothes.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	When you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, then you should give purgative medicine to clear the heart of black bile, expelling it with force, and let blood from the basilar vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The second course of treatment for them is to cut and burn that black sinew, and the other hand is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The cutting of the sinew is done according to this hand: the surgeon begins by making an incision, allowing the black sinew to be resolved and become feculent within the vein, then strengthening the vein at the point where it separates from the thigh, using a sponge, and cleansing the vein in one, two, or three places, and then lifting the black sinew with the thumb and index finger, inside the vein, until the desired amount of sinew is removed and the vein is allowed to bleed.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	When one has found that spot, and commands him to abstain from black colored feces that are generated.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the treatment with lithotomy when the veins are dilated and this is noticed in the thigh.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Then the elevation of the thigh is second to this method: you who raise the thigh, if it is swollen in it, and place the hand on it and rub the thigh with the wet belly entering when it is contracted and the veins are swollen; or if it is exercised by strong exercise, if the hand is not at your present, enter when this member is scarred.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And cut the cord at the right of the vein in section either at the end or at the bottom of the vein, or at the base of the vein you must take the thread.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And cut the cord at the end and clean the vein of all parts entering when it appears in the feeling, and you must take the appearance of the vein that sometimes turns black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so you remove and clean the cord when you see that white thread.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place the other hand inside that which is raised and is gnawed by the flesh, and hold onto that with your thumb and little finger.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut the other section at that point for three times, and scrape the flesh from the area inside the vein that appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and insert it into the rear section of the thigh, and remove that and lift it inside which is hollow by the second section, and remove that from the section that is over it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And put that inside which you have removed from the section that is raised or all the sections, and then insert it into the whole that is hollow; and do so again.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey your orders to extract and raise, then insert a pointed needle of double strength and twist it into that and remove it, or insert the other hand and rotate your thumb around the whole that is gnawed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And keep in mind that it is not inserted; if it is cut, it will be difficult to raise that hand and it will come over the thigh for that reason.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When that whole area is completely exposed, stop over the location of the wet wool covered in vinegar and unroasted oil, and cure that which is inside that has become healthy.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the joint is hindered by tortuosity that is involved in the parts, and no straight path follows, then you should cover that with your hand over the entire tortuosity of the joint and the locations of encumberance, and suspend it thereon as if it were raised at that height.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful to keep your section so that you have not pierced the vein and do not cause pain there; and use your caution in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incision made in the joint is:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of a hernia is:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not an accuitat that it is placed like the uncis or is of sharp extremity, for it does not cause the vein to be pierced by its sharpness; and it has great flexibility, which if it were subtle, would pierce the vein by its subtlety. However, there is in it excessive grossness like they have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of extracting the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs, which are low lands like the Ategi in Arabia and in the low and dry lands of India with little fertility and without grass or herb.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	When the pain is generated in other parts of the body than those already mentioned, it is called another change.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The treatment of the pain is that of putrefaction, which appears from the stomach as venomous substance coming from the heart, serpents, and worms, and those that are born between the intestine and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The susceptibility of the occurrence of this pain is from this vein that happens in the abdomen, which becomes very inflamed; and the place is pustulated; and then the vein begins to grow from the place of that pustule, which seems like a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	When the pain reaches its end, you cover that one with a piece of flesh from a dragon's head, and enter into it, and wound that and let the plum hang down from the abdomen.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	As many wounds as you see caused by this in the parts of the body, cover them with flesh and wound that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is prolonged, you insert a part of it and wrap around the wound; and if not inserted, that which is outside is not inside, but if inserted, that which is inserted goes into the flesh and causes apothesis and burning in the place and ulceration and malformation in the spot.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	When the affected part is inflamed and the fluid is extracted little by little, it is advisable to remove the dressing when it is outside the body and not return it to the body for any reason.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	This vein is found in many men who have long hands and fingers, and I have heard that one of them has twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of medication, introduce the ray into the wound and perforate that long wound through the chest to the heart, and when it is evacuated, remove all that is in the matter, and administer putrefactive medicine to the patient for several days; and cure the wound with the cure of bandages.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein has some ramps, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and goes to that orifice, and is situated among those orifices, and is located between them.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And cure the wound as has been said in the division and according to what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section of the superveneing veins under the skin and it is called bovine agony.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This malady is called a bovine disease in any land where you find cows with mottled patterns on their bodies, and it spreads throughout the entire body, causing pain in every part, and is shown by the feeling of heat in the member that disrupts the column and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of the child is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, and tapeworms, and fleas and lice in the intestines.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	When the malice of the patient is feared, for when he comes into the body and rises to the head, and goes to the mouth, if much saliva is made in it and enters and destroys the mouth, then many tongues are moved.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure that and extract it, you must not lack the ambulatory and appearance of the foot to the sense, and then cover that which is above it and the part beyond it with restraint and strength, and moisten it over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is applied to the flesh and does not cause it to atrophy, then you should stop using cauterization with fire over the location from which it will remain, and the main fear is corruption of the flesh in which the place has been corrupted as they have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if that has reached the top of the head, then you should strengthen the overlying skin with a strong restraint, and moisten it over it and extract that; and cover that the thigh uses for the improvement of the corporeal body by means of medicines evacuating putrid humors, and keep away from those that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is common in our land, and it causes pain in the joints of various members, and it spreads from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	When you have already seen that which I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to attend a woman with a swollen arm in a village, and I discovered that her arm had a small inflammation in the funis vein, and after an hour, I saw that inflammation subside as if water was being poured into this, but I did not believe that it was, as if silver were seen when it is placed in the sun.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain in that place subsided and remained in the muscle, and after an hour, it stopped.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then the other arm also corrected itself when it was passed through the other hand.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	I advise you to roll over the entire body so that you see the second that I saw; and it is too marvelous to describe the exchange of the member and the speed of the member in the member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	When you had seen that in the best hands, second to that hand, but you have seen worse hands where the members were exchanged for the members.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I did not see that in the hands as it was in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	When I first realized that it was not gout but rather something else, it was because the woman was very young, with a corpse-like body and visible veins, and in this case, there was a sensation of that pungent smell.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that this retro-curing does not appear in those who are delicate and have humors that are not clotted with veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	When you want the patient's curing and they feel the pain, do not let them appear to you as if they have been hurt, but rather hold onto that and then cut off the part and press on it with your hand and cover it with something that is not affected by that pungent smell, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not see the wound in the thighs, you should cure that excuse of the body and this that expels pungent smells and carminatives of those pills made of fennel and saffron and semblants.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of sage.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sage is diverse according to the species and the locations of the chest where they are cut, as their diversity is that of those which have large points, and small, concave, and narrow ones, and solid ones; and of those which have three angles, and of those with tongues, and of those with stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	When the second member or limbs are affected, and it is seen that the brain, heart, lungs, ribs, intestines, and other organs are involved, and when one of these members or limbs shows signs of death, which causes you to recommend that you avoid extraction of that organ in those in whom death occurs in the largest organs, and when you do not appear to have these bad signs in the first member or limbs, and the organ is not engorged in the deepest part of the member, then you can extract that and treat the abscess.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the signs of death appear in the first member or limbs, and the bones pass through the organ, and it is seen that the skull is over the brain, which happens due to violent inflammation, vertigo, and loss of consciousness, and convulsions in the limbs, and inflammation and swelling of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and much of the word is cut off and destroyed by the nail, and it is seen that the place of the wet white appearance resembles pores, and there is a sign of the carn.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	If you see these symptoms appearing to you, then avoid the cure and the extraction of the pus, if it does not come out.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the pus is located in the belly, then that side of the labia is closest to it, and it feels like a movement of the hand, and the movement of the pus resembles the movement of the fingers, and the black pus flows like blood, and there is coldness in the extremities, and sweating, and constipation; and you know that death is near.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	If the pus has infected the lung and causes it to swell with pus from the pus, and the vessels that are closest to the chest are affected, and the color of the thigh changes, and the spirit expels great amounts, and there is a desire for fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the pus is in the sac that is in the chest, and the pain occurs in the small back, and there is great and violent pain and suffocation, and not all the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the sausage is in the stomach, then you must quickly drink a lot of water to alleviate the food poisoning caused by an indigestible part.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the sausage is in the stomach and gets stuck there, or if it causes a hole in the intestine or hernia, which is not expected to be cured by the removal of the sausage.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the sausage is in the bladder and causes urine to be discharged abnormally, and it is caused by any disease in the parts that are deformed, and if there is a lot of pain in the thighs, you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Other parts of the body are similar to the face, neck, and shoulders, and the spine and vertebrae, and the tailbone, and the hip bones, and the thighs, and the legs, and they are saved when the sausage does not block the vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend this to you that you have seen of the nature of these sausages, so that it means something for you about the cure of this kind.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man there was a cyst in the lacrimal gland of his eye, and you extracted it from another part, then removed the gray matter of the hippocampus, and it was cured, and did not affect the hollow of the brain.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	When you extract another herb from a Jew's wife who was in the gray zone of the eye, the eyelid was already pushed out, and the herb was previously hidden and not noticed until a small part of it adhered to the eye, and it was a large herb of the acute herbs of the Turks, with a spear in which there were no earrings.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Jewish man is the one being treated, and it did not cause any accident to the eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	When you extract another herb from a Cretan man who was in the groin, and it was an Arab herb, and that was the one with the earrings; and then you inserted it between the thighs, and it was already submerged in the groin of the man; and then you subtly extracted it, and brought it out, and cured the Cretan.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	When you extract another herb from a man who was in the belly, and thought it would be useful for that; and then, because it had not moved for xxx days and there was no cause for any of his dispositions, you inserted it over the herb and applied it to that, and it cured him, and there was no accident worse than the one he had.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	When you see a man who has a squire thrusting a thorn into his back, and the wound is closed over it, and it has been there for about five days, and the thorn is still in the corner of the thigh, then you should remove the thorn.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I saw a woman who had a thorn thrust into her belly, and the wound was closed over it, and it did not change its position in any of her natural functions, and the woman did not have any difficulty in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another man who had a thorn thrust into his face, and the wound was closed over it, and the thorn was still in place, and there was no pain, and it did not seem to be bothering him.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	I removed the thorn from the man of the princes of the king who had it thrust into his nostril and had already declined to the right side, and the entire thorn was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to the care of the man in three days for the removal of the thorn.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then you removed the wound of the thorn with great care; and then you inquired of that woman subtly, and did not feel her pulse; rather, I felt her pulse at my fingertips, and then I suspected that this puncture was at the end of the thorn.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	When you find the location where it is most attractive and digestive, making sure that this place is chosen for me to see the location of the sacred, so that I can pass over it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	If no accident occurs in the location that the sage has achieved that place; and you continue to apply pressure on it for several days without any accident; and the plague becomes solidified, and the chest of the patient improves by the space of several days each day that the sage senses the pain in my head and returns to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then you continue to apply the acute, corrosive medicine over the plague for several days until it burns, and I hold the patient's hand, and I gently pull out that, and I remove the tip of the sage from the fistula.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you adjust the opening of the plague for that acute medicine until I can see the tip of the sage clearly, and it takes some time for me to pass through those spaces within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	Then you make the plague focused and able to enter the forceps into me, and hold it there, and do not obstruct its growth, and you did not stop refining and engineering over that with my fingers of the engine, when I began to use the forceps to remove it from the end of the head, according to the shape of those at the base of the capital, when I extracted it; and you restored the plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	When the doctors examined the patient and found that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, I restored it and made the plague solidify, and the wound healed for the entire body, and did not relapse in it due to any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extracting some sage plants to pause this rule and understand about what I have not said, that four parts of this part and the definitions of that are not understood in the narration or not understood by me.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The artificers of the savior know little about motion; and I think that this is present about what is absent; and the novel operation is interrupted and the novel instrument must have the descent of the strange causes of the art when it occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And you say that sage plants are not outside the members in which they are hanged only by two hands: either by attraction of the place where the intestine is inserted, or by the contrary of another part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is hanged by the place where the intestine is inserted, or is sage plant proceeding from the flesh, and is pulled and hanged.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not obey the time for cutting, then you will see that you lay it for a certain number of days until the flesh that is in the vicinity of the wound becomes pale and the attraction of the wound and its discharge are lost.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If you seem to be stuck in the bone and do not obey your time for cutting, then you will lay it for a certain number of days and repeat it as the attraction and motion change every day, and eventually it will come out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not obey your time for cutting for a certain number of days, then you will see that you perforate in the circuit of the suture in that bone of the total part that is amplified by the suture, and you will extract that.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the suture is stuck in the skull and has already passed through one of the cavities of the brain, and appears in the wound of those accidents that you say, then you should not extract the suture and lay it for a certain number of days until it is equal to the time; but if the suture is stuck in the eye, then the death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the wound is not found only in the body of the bone but also does not pass through the cipher, and the leg is treated for several days, and no such accidents occur due to these accidents, then you should focus on the wound and its treatment.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If the wound is not healing and does not follow your instructions for removal, then you should administer appropriate treatments in the circuit of the wound as recommended, and properly care for the area that has become healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the wound is already aggravated in the location of the body, and is causing discomfort, then you should investigate that pain, and if you feel that pain, then aim at that pain with the tools that are most convenient for the treatment of the leg.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constraint of the plague and its length, and here there are no nerves or veins, then you should focus on the plague when it is amplified and when it is possible to extract the wound.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held in the hands that hold it, then you should cut through the flesh where the wound is located, and focus on that, using your ingenuity; and use your ingenuity if you cannot cut through the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in the twist of those that do not obey.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you are performing the extraction of the uterus in any location where it is, use your own twist of the forceps at all parts that pass through that obese one; and subtly use the subtlety that the uterus is not torn and is gently drawn towards you and that of this extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot over that of your time, use your hands for a few days after they have been moistened with the parts that are in the circuit of the uterus, and then repeat that which you hold.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you have any objection to this, use that which has been said for the cure in the capital city.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer care in all hands that you can to the escape of the uterus; and make am ease, tranquility, time, and firmness as it is and as you have commanded.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And when you make the uterus contract so that this thigh follows the figure that is following the figure of the force that you must have on the uterus, which is less just.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	When the thighs are swollen or have been affected by another part of the body, or if they have already undergone any procedure on another part, or if there is an increase in the extrusion of the thigh due to the sentiment of the part that has been pressed into the previous cord and sometimes that eminent; then you cleanse over it; and the incision should be made according to the quantity in which they grip the forceps; and then attract it, so that it is slightly pressed into the edema.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If the thigh is held in the bone, then you twist the hand according to the opposite direction when the thigh presses on the bone, and expand it as much as possible, and extract it from there.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if necessary, cleanse that area every day, and repeat it as needed.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the end of the thigh is in that area, then you press on that with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the end of the thigh is cut off and needs to be administered with pressure, then you insert it and if it is narrow, stretch it so that it fits between the concavity of the thigh and the end of the thigh and press on it with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the woman's belly is concave, then you should push on that side with a hard force until it returns to its original position.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the woman's belly is intoxicated, then you should cover that part of the flesh where the wound is, as much as possible, and apply something to it that is suitable for the purpose.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the woman's belly is swollen, or in the chest, or in the abdomen, or on the side, and it is near that which you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to do so without causing pain, then you should gently pull out that part, and keep hold of the vein or nerve, and take it out, and if necessary, cleanse it after it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps used for gripping the uterus:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of them are like the teeth of a saw, which are sharp when they grip the uterus.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And those are special movements, large, few and small, according to the quantity of the size of the uterus and the width of the pelvis, and the width of the wound, and the contraction of the muscle.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	This line seems to describe the method of treating an injury or condition at the extremity (end) of the body. The text mentions "impellent concau" which could be translated as "impelling force" and "ayssi" which might refer to the affected area. The phrase "pena de ausel" could mean "pain in that part" and "alleujat le intrament de la sageta" might refer to releasing or removing an obstruction in the body. The last part of the sentence is unclear, but it seems to mention a
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	This line could be translated as: "Form of impelling force for the extremity:" or "Method of applying pressure to the extremity:".
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	This line could be translated as: "in that way that it is released from the obstruction in the concave part of the body and is impelled with force." or "In this manner, the obstruction is removed from the concave part of the body and pressure is applied with force.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	This line could be translated as: "Of fleabites of the veins." or "Regarding fleabites
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	This line seems to describe various types of veins that are commonly targeted for fleabite treatment. The text mentions "venas de fleubotomia" which could be translated as "veins for fleabite treatment". The rest of the sentence describes specific types of veins, including those in the head, ears, and eyes, as well as those near the nose, mouth, and lungs. The last part of the sentence mentions "algelic" veins, which might refer to veins located in the arm or chest.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	1. When the veins that have been cut in the arms are considered, four of them are called cephalic veins, and they are part of the wild oak tree; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a small vein, and it is composed of one branch from the oak tree and another branch from the cephalic vein; and that vein is called "the vein of the whole body," and the oak vein is the one that is cut in the domestic latex, and it is called "citellary," and the people call the veins of the abdomen "the veins of the belly"; and the veins of the arms, and they are placed over the focus, and it is that one which is cut for the flebotomy, and it is the one that appears above the poutz for apparent manifestation; and the salvage vein, and it is the one that is between the ear and the little pus, and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and the leg, there are three veins; one of those is that which is far from the curvature of the wild deer's thigh; the second is the sciatic vein, its location is where the domestic deer's thigh is; and in the thigh, there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The beauty of the veins that are closest to the anus is catarrh, anemia, emigration, and ulcers of the old head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of sucking those is second that you recommend to me: it is that the anus is clean, and the anus is sucked in the occiput in the place where the veins are wide for good friction; if you stretch the anus with a rod in one place where the doors and the holes of those are seen in two places of the head; and that is what I said, and if you feel the polls of those in the said way, here is a tent.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the scalpel, and that is the one that happens, and then introduce that there into the vein through which the flap comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	When you raise your arm, remember to hold onto the vein and the tendon in the areas where you inserted the needle, and insert the needle into the same spot.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two-thirds of the distance or as close as possible; and it should be made as small as possible.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And press firmly on the powder and place it in the area that is healing.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And before starting the free incision, make an incision and cauterize those areas.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Many of the arteries and veins that are used in the ancient method of fleshotomy are evil and unhealthy, and they cause frequent and constant inflammation and excessive bleeding at the edges.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of fleshotomy on those areas is second only to what I recommend to you: tighten the thigh, make sure to feel the veins coming out clearly and manifestly, and demonstrate their direction with your hands; and then try to hold onto them.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And you raise the tendon over the vein in the areas indicated by the method I recommend, and insert the fleshotomy incision there, and lift the vein up; and make sure to cauterize it as you did on the other veins; and make sure to run the sanc according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And remove the abdominal lining, and place a piece of cloth over the vein for an hour, and then place it on that part and strengthen that which is most constrained, and release that which has been healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the prescription of these has already been memorized, and those have been inscribed, and the attraction at the beginning of freedom.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the advantage of fleebotomy on the veins of the face is that it is similar to the fleebotomy of the cranium in old wounds of the face, emigration, and surgery, and ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the fleebotomy of the patient is such that you recommend it to me; so it is that the abdomen stretches the inner part of the leg that appears to be the vein; and then hold the instrument that is called the fostrum of which this is the form of the same:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point prominently on the top of the fostrum over that vein and press on it with your hand or another cause in the palm of your hand, and release the healing according to the quantity you want; and remove the abdominal lining and strengthen that which has been healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	When some incisions are made on the skin, but it is not clear if they are of sharp extremity or not, as with the others, it is likely to be of that type, and the incision is made on the second transverse line, where the bones are prominent and the teeth can easily penetrate the flesh in that incision when subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The goodness of the two veins that are the tear ducts of two eyes for the scabs on the eyelids, and the cleansing of the face's wounds.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the fleshotomy is that it stretches the skin so that it can be held in one hand, and you should stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And if the incision is made according to the transverse line of a few fleshotomies few, where there is no flesh; and if the incision is subtle, then the extremity of it is easily cut.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And as much of the sinew as is necessary to you, and stand over those hooks, and stretch them with a new string, and tighten them around those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	When the blood vessels in the nose are affected, they are referred to as acute fever and violent soda, and the skin diseases of the face and neck, as well as the rash that occurs in the face, and most importantly when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the nasal blockade is that it stretches the cheek and pushes the nose forward towards your left side, and holds the nasal blockade subtly long and places it in the right corner of the head of the nose second rectitut, so that the vein does not feel here, and so the sinus begins to flow the most.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Be sure to open your mouth gradually and make it run over the sinus according to your need; and apply it to that part for a moment, so that it is restored gently.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The advantage of nasal blockage is that it helps to restrict the flow of air, the beginning of leprosy, and the treatment of skin diseases and wounds, and is used as an alternative to herpidermia.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the nasal blockade is that it stretches each cheek out in front of you; and the artist should be on the head of the patient, and the patient's head should be placed on a pillow.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	When the vein is cut, it should be cut long and thin; and then extracted from the body in small amounts or as needed to meet the need; and it should resemble another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then loosen the ligament and strengthen the tightened veins by stricture, so that the thigh is not tense, and enter the mattress where the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The advantages of the fleebotomy of the veins are small papules and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and cheeks, and poor ulcers and fissures, as well as poor ulcers in the nose and ears.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the fleebotomy is that it speeds up the healing of the patient, strengthens the waist of the body with a needle, and rotates the lips of the patient and looks at the other veins of which one is on the left side of the lip and the other on the right; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of the fingers, and it is less in the circuit of those small black veins; and then insert each in a hole.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have any doubt further on, and do not know which of those is the correct one, you will understand the majority of them, and the manifest symptoms of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And give the appearance of the veins that are in the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary to insert the veins that are in the lip more easily.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	It is customary to insert the veins that are in the tongue the more easily. The flebotomy of the head at prefocacios that is in the guolayro, the malautia of the uvula, and the malautias of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of flebotomizing those is that follows the malautia between the most distant parts of the sole, and elevates the tongue, and looks further at the tongue, of one lumen of the vein and of another lumen of the vein, and the color of each one is turning black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then flebotomize each one; and keep you that you do not cut the vein too much, and leave those as arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the veins in your groin have been cut, which is common in all men, and the veinectomy is done by two hands, or a small piece of lemon or olive is used for subtlety; or it is done with a scalpel, and it is called this:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This necessity is that of sectioning and of those specific lats and subtills according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the stricture of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	The first line of the text is not in English, but rather in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin,
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The number of the patient's veins is sometimes greater, and it is necessary to open the flattened full veins that contain fatty tissue.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the form of fleshing an orange:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This small incision is made at a lower latitude and with a subtle extremity, and it corresponds to a subtle vein that contains a subtle amount of citrus.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	When the benefit of the basilican vein section is greatest, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the liver that is behind the shoulder blade and into the abdomen, and from there it goes to the stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And the physician, when performing the vein section, should be careful not to injure that part and keep it over-thinking until there is an artery, and if he errs and punctures the wrong spot during the vein section, he may cut the artery and cause blood clots, so that it is not advisable to perform a vein section without experience.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilican vein is not visible, you should believe that you have sectioned it and that you have moved to the other, or that you surround some ram that you do not know; or that you have sectioned the vein in the end of the arm, where it is visible, and puncture it with the physician's knowledge.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want to section the metatarsal vein, you should consider the stricture of the arm that touches the location where you want the polls to be, and place it over the one you need; and then tie the arm and cut the vein with the concave section of the fleubotomy according to what has been said, and make sure that the percussion is in the space of the artery location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see that the limb is being stretched, inflammation occurs in the place where you have observed, and that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore it swells up.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If the pain comes back in the same place as the incision during the laparotomy, and it is subtle red, you know that it is from the sac of the artery; then take and hold the piece of cloth over that for a long space; and when you remove it, if the pain disappears, four knots will also disappear, and you should tighten the arm and let go of that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	When you guard the wound of the foot, and it is over-fearful of the foot and does not become healthy within a few days, then:
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the wound does not heal, and sometimes you have to wait for medical attention, you should insert an artery, if it appears to you; or at its extremity, and it separates from the sac; or if you hold a previous piece of fistula, and then press that one and hold it over the location of the vein that is strictured, and the pulvisent within another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the wound separates, that is good; and if not, you cure that of which is preceded by the remembrance of the location of the pus outflows from the sac.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the separation of the wound of the sac is difficult in the positions disposed by the small location of the plague and the possibility of the vein of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Less of the black vein, fleebotomy is beneficial that extracts the sac from the subcutaneous part of the head and to the end of the chest; therefore, which is composed of ram of the basilica and ram of cephalica, as they have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	When cutting the flesh, take care not to cut the nerve that is above the flesh cut in the flesh cut; and if it adjusts in the puncture of the flesh cut and paralyzes the nerve, it will cause the patient's stupor, and it will be difficult to cure the patient, and he will not be fully cured. This nerve moves with the feeling; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not shown, you should cover the flesh cut with your hand where you cut the flesh for which you cut the flesh for the purpose of sectioning the skin, and avoid the nerve with your own strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you must cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of cutting the cephalic vein is that it relieves headaches and alleviates foot pain.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And remember in this, if you want to cut the vein or not, it is saved for all the veins, and none of the artery or nerves are affected.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is important to you that the cephalic vein blockage does not cause headaches, and you should surround the incision site with a bandage, and do not notice if there are no signs of inflammation at the first tap over the blocked cephalic vein.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is even more important for you to pay attention to the patients, when not cutting the cephalic vein in the first tapping, and do not notice in the future of that apothem.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the cephalic vein cutting and the accidents that occur in its removal, in which you should think about their correction in the future.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first source sentence translates to:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	If the pain is truly gout and it has been three hours since the first pulse was felt, then...
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	When the least amount of surgery is administered, when it is convenient and necessary for this purpose, or at any other time, in total hours and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	When a woman is pregnant for twelve years and has not been castrated yet, and the womb is not castrated until the fourth month within the seventh, and the children are not castrated that have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when any woman wishes to be castrated for whatever reason, it is recommended that the intestines be cut off under the castration, if they have a closed fist, so that the veins do not flow into the castration of the intestines, which are pure and do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And the pregnant women who are not castrated, nor are they cleansed of feces and excretion, nor escape from any disease or evil that may be inside them, nor evil of ydropsy, and much less that castration is feared by colic pain and vomit, and by wind in the belly, and multiplication of cells and work and exercise of sleep or watching, and for any cause that dissolves virtue, or is a body or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is worth considering in a subtle way of the humors that are present here, if the pain is large, then thin and sharp, and if possible, use medications that are suitable for this.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if you enter in the bath and there is no prohibition for any cause, or it is suitable for some exercise to reduce this pain.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the fleboematosis of the day's pain, it is time for the third hour, as they have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And you should ask that this pain of that day be kept in the total accidents of all animals, as they have said, with anxiety, anger, fear, and all corporal accidents, as they work and superfluous pain and semblance to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at its own session, the causes should be present in the use of that which is customary for men to have aromaticity and fragrance, and to have balms and semblances according to the second part of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the fleboematosis on a cushion that is placed on whether that coyss ispus or the one that was meant to be fleboematized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And take out the other arm, and cut that one with the scalpel or three times; and stretch the limb with the cord and involve that cut with the cord.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the stricture is tightened, that the stricture which does not engulf, or the stricture is superfluous, you forbid the flow of blood; or it is mollified, and you forbid the corse of the sanc and excess.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And take the stricture, so that that which gives you to be flebotomized cuts your hands through between them when the veins are inflamed, and they are declared by feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the scalpel is made of an ancient olive oil properly; and stop the hand on the other side of the vein, that place where you want to flebotomize, so that the vein escapes a little, and the percussion is set aside as much as possible of the veins which are that which atrobes as corda fugent from the flebotomy, and of those which are full of wind and when you stop the flebotomy over that one, you must release the scalpel; and the flebotomy does not cut the vein, and if it cuts, that one is stretched.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, in order that this forceps may be stopped and be actively engaged in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	When you stop the bleeding, if the vein is swollen in one part, then do so; otherwise, you will have to repeat this another vein on that side or over it at another place, or under its appendage, if the place is not clotting.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is clotted or the thigh is swollen, you should lie down for a day or two, and do not strain your limbs, as it may cause another hematoma to form, nor should you be in a hurry.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And if necessary, repeat the incision if needed.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and bleeds slowly, but you fear that it will not stop bleeding with the amount you need, then repeat the incision in that direction secondarily and adjust the wound with a little more incision, and do not be in a hurry until the place stops bleeding, as in many cases a little more incision is needed.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if the wound has already clotted, do not repeat the incision over it, as there is no cause for you to do so; and pause over that certain part of the fence of the gut, as it relieves the pain in the abdomen.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	When it is better in this place than oil and the others.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	When it seems that the incision is made in a proper manner during the operation, in which the surgeon cuts the veins and prevents the flow of blood from the heart to the body, and when one of the surgeons pauses over a certain part of the wound, then the sanc (a term used for a sac or pouch) subtilates (becomes smaller) and revolves (turns inside out).
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If in the location of the incision a great abscess is formed, which has mottled veins and mostly on that which was not bled except for that vein, or in the inflammation of the small vein, and you cut it, and place your hand over the area, and moisten it with water and salt, a few times, and hold it for an hour, then it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And so that the wound heals properly in this way, according to the complement of that vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If, in the location for several days, there is no black or green color, then it is not known; and if you want, place your hand over that cause of aloe and dissolution, or a cause of sweat from the mentastre or calament or semblant of the like.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The first source sentence translates to: "The visible movements of the stars are due to the eminences of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then pause your hand over that part, and if you cause any discomfort, place your compression over that area, that eminence is wicked and evil; and then keep doing it for that reason that they have said, for I fear that blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply this to the pain that is stitched, so that the place is endurant, and take care of that so that it is cured in the other cure after it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	E cover that extractions from the artery are given to every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that comes out of the artery, and that appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the artery is black, you should take it out when it is red; and apparently, if you see it is big, you should take it out when it is subtle; and apparently, if it is sharp, when it is left without sharpness.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And cover to that which is fat and strong and requires an extraction of the artery through a vein, where the flebotomy is amplified and the flebotomies are long.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	When the joint is swollen, make a point in the opposite direction, and withdraw that which has come out in a straight line.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best administration for venous phlebitis is the transverse incision, not the puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This maneuver for phlebitis is saved from the flow of sinus and the injury of nerves, and is praised and considered a safe flebitic incision laterally and longitudinally.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And it is customary to have sinuses after the flebitic incision, and you should clean that with the flebitic incision using a small piece of gauze or simple oxide; and extract the blood from three or four veins.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is inflammation of the collection, you should take from the flebitic incision in the ear or in the ear or in an aromatic ointment such as cinnamon, ginger, and other similar ones like cloves, or in an aromatic ointment with a pleasant odor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you experience hematuria, and it is caused by the passage of blood from the urinary tract, then you should know that the urine has a strong smell and an unpleasant odor; and use aromatic substances for relief, and apply them to the affected area.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that have been said in the division of the capital of hematuria for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if you want to dissolve the prostate and evacuate the sperm, use the one that has been mentioned in the division of the capital for evacuation, and the quality of the sperm is good, which evacuates a little at a time, so it is followed by the quantity in the following days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Moreover, if you want to dissolve the prostate and evacuate the sperm secondarily, and the semen is thick, then you should apply it for about seven hours or nine days after the first division of the capital.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Moreover, if you want to dissolve the sperm of the corpus and direct it towards the opposite side of the division, use it on the second day or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When the body has already become inflamed and sharp, it is covered with a sac that contains the sick part in a bag and the bag is filled with a large amount of liquid, and the perforation is amplified so that the pus does not escape from inside the sinus; and you will have preserved all the conditions for flebotomy; and you must place your hand over the corpse's fingers to prevent the blood from flowing in place of the sinus, as there are four veins that open when the flebotomizer is ignored and neglected.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you do not know how to release the arm and remove the sick part secondarily, as the wound of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to extract the sickness, then you must press with great force on that side with your hand bent at an angle, but it is too much.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	If the body has already been opened secondarily; or remain here at once with the sharpness of the flebotomy that is coagulated by the sickness in the vein's opening; or place your hand over the tympanic ear or the sagittal, and compress that within which the sickness is outside and healthy.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is blocked, you should lay your hand on that spot and do not touch it within the area where the blockage is settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it requires you to evacuate the wound secondarily, and not to excuse yourself, you should mark that location on the other hand or in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis of the arm" is slit at the location of the fusca or basilica, when it is not severe or swollen, and is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the fleubotomy of that vein is that it introduces its hand into the water tail inside the tumor that twists and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And hold your strength over that arm and apply a tight bandage; and the fleubotomy is made according to the transverse small one, not latitudinally nor according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And is the incision wide and is your fleubotomy at that vein over the joint of the foot a small one?
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if it is prohibited the flow of the wound, you should place your hand in the water tail and let the wound run in the water as soon as you can meet your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, you would excuse yourself from the recurrence of the horse's tail in the water, and the more it pauses, the heart of the horse is in the water for a longer time during racing.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The first line of the text is not provided in the given text. However, I can help translate the following lines:
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The first line of the text is not in the language you described, but rather in Latin. The translation of this line is: "The surgery of the shoulder of the left arm is referred to as the maladies of the foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the incision for the patient is that you tighten the string around the limb or your own, because you have placed it on the tail, and if the vein is inflamed and it is demonstrated at the same time; and the flesh cuts through it; and if it is not closed at all, then this will not help in relief.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And make sure that your hand does not hurt the patient's intestine, for then you will see the nerves of the three denuded parts of the belly.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then cut the intestine along the tail and let it run through that, for if you do not cut it in the tail, the suture will coagulate in the blood clotting wound, and it is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	Then when you extract the suture according to the amount of need, stop over the vein or artery and salt it, so that it is not firmly consolidated; and it seems that you will make a straight cut in total.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The advantage of the incision for that of the patient's left leg is that it is conferred to the diseases of the thigh.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	When it comes to the anesthesia of the patient as you have done in the other,
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the vein section in the anesthesia is that it leads to the relief of pain in the areas where the patient has more pain than in other parts, such as menstrual discomfort, ulcers on the thighs and ancient changes in the chest, and a similar feeling of pain.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the anesthesia is that it allows the patient to enter water with their head down and to pass over the area where there are veins; and it covers the joint of the foot with a cushion, and the location of the vein appears to be the one you described, and it ramifies in the face of the foot with small branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, the anesthesia allows the foot to be ample and the cushion to be placed on the leg, where the addition of the cushion is better and the foot is more comfortable.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you anesthetize that area on the face of the foot, be careful not to touch the nerves that are in front of it on the face of the foot, and pause your anesthesia at the point where you perform the anesthesia through the passage, as if you wanted to insert it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is custom
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	And if the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, it is customary to call it gout. Then, you must remove the affected part of the foot from the water and run your hand along the joint until the swelling is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cautery goes wrong in the first attempt, then repeat it on a few places of the skin where the wound was; and do not fear the surgeon, rather hope that he will save your nerves as they have been said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	It seems to me that there is a problem with the other foot's joint.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	If the operation of the cautery on you is done with great care when it is permanently cut,
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the cautery operation is that it quickly and strongly holds the wound of the other foot in place, and when it is over, it firmly closes the incision of the wide part within the foot of four fingers long, which does not appear until afterwards.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, you should cut that second incision as close to your body as possible and then perpendicularly, which is better; or if you want to make an incision, do so at the end of the cut, and the wound will heal well.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	When the pain is in a man's foot; and if it becomes worse, and does not appear to be all over, then make a small incision on some part of the foot, and that is the one that appears in the two sides of the foot, along with the ear and the anus.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And keep your hands on the nerves, and run the amount you need.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And reduce the stricture and place your hand over the location of the incision, so that it heals as soon as possible.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of cold humors and the quality of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Cold is from corn, or from earth, or from wind.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And cold is caused by certain substances: one of them is the removal and extraction of sinew, and the other is the application of cold.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this cold that is applied through scarification is made from certain substances, either by fire or not.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the cold administered through scarification and extraction of sinew are fourteen parts of the body, of which one part is the head, and the other part is the same as the left side of the neck; and the third part is the mental angle of the chin; and the fourth part is the mandible below the mouth; and the fifth part is the spatula; and the sixth part is the alosther, and it is on the end of the beard; and the seventh part is two cavities; and the eighth part is two braces; and the ninth part is two holes.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	When the venous blood is not extracted from the thin, scattered veins in the flesh, and therefore does not nourish the body as it should, nor does it cover the wound with a plaster; nor does it come that veinlessness is a disease of the focus or its focus in any other part of the body for repletion when the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it causes pain in the vein, then administer medicine at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the same place and at any time it is needed.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The causes are in those who suffer from the multiplication of the vein when it is necessary to extract blood by venostasis and atrophies in the face; and in those who atrophy and become weak in the neck and shoulders, and in the arms; and in those who become pale and lose their strength in the face and front, and in the eyes; and in those whose focus location is lost; and in those whose focus risks are multiplied; and in those whose taste in the mouth is lost, or whose tongue is postponed and spits out saliva; and in those who sleep is multiplied, and in those who feel sensation in the sleeping body, with restlessness and aches and other causes of their appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	When, in any case, and particularly if it occurs in the third or fourth month of the month, you command venthazic to be made a point that has passed two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	When the jaw of a child is affected by tetanus and it causes convulsions in the head and affects the limbs, then it is most likely that this is an eviction of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This wind is in the location of craniotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	When it is not necessary to use that which is of the complexion of the patient or in the cold, it gives way to that great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it is not necessary to use those hairs, and in the heads of those who are sick with bad complexions.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	For that which is over it continues to be on it and causes forgetfulness; and therefore it is necessary that you command the wind to pause its breath for a little while in the parts where it was, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Less wind is needed in the place of alkemistry than veno-constriction of the black vein and the basilica: and therefore it confers to asthma, and to the constriction of the gallbladder, and to the scissure of the stomach of gall, and to the throat, and to replecio.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the alkemistry wind be slightly stopped, so that if it is paused later, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the alkemistry wind confers to the accidental pains in the head and obtalmia, and emigrance, and preocupation, and pain in the gums of the teeth; and it is in place of the veno-constriction of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the windblower not to press too hard on its cheek, as it may pierce the artery and cause blood clots to flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The windblower is placed on the chin to relieve toothache, as well as the corruption of the gums, and the similarity to those found in the mouth, and remains in place for flebo-tomy of the inferior alveolar nerves.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the windblower that is placed on the teeth comforts the capillaries, which are made for the repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the windblower that is placed on the teeth provides comfort to the capillaries, which are divided by the heat of the furnace, so it is of the basilica, dark and cephalic, where at that time the blood of all those veins is held by the muscles that are in the flesh, and the thin veins of other veins that pass through the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the windblower not to process too much in scarification, as the location is stripped of flesh, and leave the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	This is a difficult one, as it seems to be written in a dialect of Spanish or Portuguese, rather than a Romance language like Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's my best attempt at translating it:
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When commanded by the wind, a large wind is needed, and it should be of earthly origin; then, the location that requires great cutting will be indicated; and then, the fine winds are subtle and should be shaved in the shaving manner.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Many winds of the thighs are manifested, which reach the entire body, and comfort the old pains of the knees and groin, and of the vagina; and provoke menstruation, and comfort both male and female; and stand in place for fleebotomy of distaffs, and alahorcoben, and of cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Then, the entire body is deflated and small holes are made in the men's homes.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the winds alahorcoben, the joy is given to the joy of the winds of the thighs' changes.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that the wind is paused at the beginning of the view and is shaved with gentle shaving, and does not prolong the position of the winds, less pause those parts, and return those to their original position, and that the humors come to the place by chance.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	When you do not cease to apply this and continue to enter until you see the place already swollen and inflamed, and the sign of the gout appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	When you shave and scrape a little at a time, and consider the position of the body,
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that person who has tender flesh on rare parts of the body is cut with a scalpel and not sewn up, the wound may become infected.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	When ordering the winder to enlarge the incision and make it wider, and at the same time facilitate the bleeding.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If in the sinus it grows, then cover that you make points on several days, and in the first point make an incision in the sinus and in the aquosity of the body.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Less in the second to the examination of the extracted sinus,
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the sinus is full of pus, then make a third incision in the sinus to be able to remove the pus.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when you want to extract the sinus little by little or in small pieces, it is enough for us one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if you want to extract more than one sinus, make a deep incision; and if we find that the sinus is large, then cover that you make a deep incision in the extraction.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The end of the incision is the depth of the wound alone.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the skin is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are narrow, then cover that the openings of the veins are more lenient, wider, and more resolute; if it is in the summer, use olive oil or olive oil of garlic, or olive oil of mugwort, or olive oil of cinnamon; and if it is in the winter, use nut oil, olive oil, olive oil of camomile, or olive oil of sinus, and those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the superfluity is large, then, you should make the oil be from olive, or balsam, or balm, or aloe, and it will resemble it.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the wind is from large parts of flesh, you should cover that it is not allowed to oil, and cover that this loci of ventosa of theirs are prop near the ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros or am aygua freja de solatrum, or am aygua de coja, or am aygua de bordolaguas, and they will resemble it.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that of which the sauce is from motly humidity, wash your wind with water or with vinegar and it will resemble it.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of that of which the superfluity is large, wash your wind with water or with vinegar, or with sauce that is greater, or with decoccio of anet, or of camamilla, and it will resemble it.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And cover that the wind is kept under the bandage; having covered that it is maintained at the same distance from the bandage for an hour or for two, and that it sleeps under the wind.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	This is a Latin phrase that translates to: "What should be done before bloodletting before ventilation?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When you consider the beginning: if the patient has cold-inducing humors that cause inflammation and heat, then you should cover the affected area with cooling causes, such as milk vinegar, and apply wet cloths, and julep, and to their liking.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause the patient's diet with such foods as lettuce, and lean meats, and condensed fats, and to their liking.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that which causes the complexion to become bright, cover the affected area with cooling and drying ointments, such as those made from aloe or aluminum, or sumac, and let there be little use of grease and food, and pause the patient's diet of lean meats, petits aquaforts, and coal and vinegar.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And cover that in the day of colic and inflammation, the grease should be more than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And cover that in some hours with Tyrrian alums, or muscle medicaments, such as those made from muscles, or alcohol applied to the colic or inflammation, so that the main members are comfortable and the sore is subdued; and do not cover that scald.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	When the winds that are used for the patient's excision are winds that have been paused on their feet, and over the knees and big toe, and over the umbilicus in the locations of the hips, and the groin, and the inner thigh, these members do not suffer excision upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	It is not sought for those only but attraction of member, as winds are paused on the breast in the flow of sanctuary of sanctuary of nails; and they use that way that the wind is dissolved from the member's fringe invisibly, as winds are paused over the belly and umbilicus; then that rare member is scalped and removes the pain that resolves wind excision.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And if it has been paused over the hips when they fall into their impotence or dryness, then by virtue of strong attraction for the good of impotence, the woman's impotence is eradicated and the dryness of her place is removed.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems that when it has been paused over the foot and knee wind excision is needed in those enclosed ones.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	This winding is managed with good success, and some are managed with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some winds are managed with water in the throat of the hernia.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is because the wind is filled and is large, it is water alone or water in which there are certain herbs to help this.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of wind administered with fire: the width of the orifice is two thirds; the quantity of the preon is the largest part of a palm; and it is in the middle of it, in the location where it is in the circuit, the width of it, the thrust is small according to the quantity that enters it one needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is painful to apply oils of rose or citron, of large margins, lion, and teeth, according to what does not lead the member to its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if the edge of the vein transverse of oil or iron, where candles are placed over the fire, is painful.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this wind is greater than that of which they have recommended; and the little more of that according to the hernia and the state of that who uses it of that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When the winds of the anus and extinguish others that the winds of the young and large bellies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of pausing this ventilation over the member is that it extends the focus of the willow wood slightly by a little wax candle, and places it over the middle of the tail transverse in the middle of the ventilation, so that the focus is lit around the part thereby preventing the heat from burning the thighs of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And if it is placed over the thigh of the patient, and they say it is on the track that has been said, then when you have the ventilation and do not indicate that they have said it and that it is necessary to sprinkle water on that track, then the ventilation will be too dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And they say the focus follows its own hand, and it is done if you indicate that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More ventilation that is administered in the thigh of the patient, and not transverse or track, and it is not administered except that it is full of water, and it is placed over the member only so.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this ventilation, the more it is large, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text "Capitol .xc
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	The provided text appears to be in a language similar to Latin, but it is not a complete sentence and contains some words that are not recognized as standard Latin or any other known language. Therefore, I am unable to provide a translation for this particular line. If you could provide more context or the surrounding sentences, I would be happy to help further.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	This line translates to: "And the quality of using those that if you have found gouty that are in the pus-filled wounds of the world." In other words, it suggests using certain substances or remedies for treating gout, which is a type of arthritis characterized by sudden, severe pain and inflammation in the joint
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	This line translates to: "And let them rest the day and the night in watery dressing when they are hungry, and do not blame any cause in the stomach of those; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning of the operation and the venting; and let the leg of the thigh be fried when it is wrinkled; and let them be placed over it." In other words, it provides instructions for treating a patient with gout, including resting, hydration, evacuation of the body, and frying the affected leg.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When they are full and in case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to make the wound airtight, it will heal faster.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Otherwise, wash the wound with clean water and apply an antiseptic; it will be cleaned and purified.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the sanctification is prolonged with the pain of the blood vessels, and it remains, you should dip that in clean water, and place a cloth over it to absorb the remaining fluid.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the sanctification is multiplied, you should sprinkle powdered vitriol or sulfuric acid on it, or similar to the causes of stigmata, within which the sanctification is separated; or they are placed over the location with the eyes of split peas, and they are left inside where the peas adhere to the location, and the sanctification is separated.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And finally, if necessary, changing the blood vessels, when possible, change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the blood vessels are prohibited from suspension, you should clean the wound with the sanctification or leave a needle in the places within which the sanctification is placed; and they are placed over it when any sacred fluid comes into contact with it.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want to sweat, sprinkle a few drops of water, or salt, or ashes, and drink it all.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Now begins the second section on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is a necessary view of the art of medicine; and is a restoration of fracture and accidental displacement in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, wise that you ask of this chapter the follies and vanities of the humors and those who do not at any time pay attention to the free will of the ancients nor read one letter of their works.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this collection of the sciences in our land is private; and you do not have it obligated at any time to be of everything; and I was not allowed to take it until after long reading of the works of the ancients and study on their understanding, until when I extracted the science of them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct experiments and studies in the course of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And you have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and the experiments I have made of it; that I am open to you and free from occupation with extension; and I am open to you at the end of occupation; and it shows to you at the end of declaration; and forms in this many forms of the substances that I administer in that, as is added by declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	The first source sentence is not provided in the text you've given.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	This sentence is also not provided in the text you've given. Please provide the complete text or the context for me to assist you better.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	This sentence is also not provided in the text you've given. Please provide the complete text or the context for me to assist you better.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	This sentence is also not provided in the text you've given. Please provide the complete text or the context for me to assist you better.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	This sentence is also not provided in the text you've given. Please provide the complete text or the context for me to assist you better.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	This sentence is also not provided in the text you've given. Please provide the complete text or the context for me to assist you better.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	When the bone begins to be restored, you should cover that the diet consists of nutritive foods that are not heavy and greasy, as those that consist of wheat bread soaked in water, and meat, and cheese, and poultry, and fish, and fruits of cows, and eggs, and vegetables, and for these, this diet causes coagulation of the fracture with leucocytes and honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You know that bones become thin in men who have had the first attack and those who are decayed, it is not possible that they continue to grow and be solidized later in nature due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they become solid and continue to grow in accordance with nature for the dryness of their members, and this continues and becomes solid even in the end of elasticity, as those of the small bones.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and embraces the cut bone of the whole part with some appearance similar to glue that adheres and strengthens it within what is consolidated and attached, within what comes from the end of fortitude and firmness, as fire at the beginning, within what any cause does not prohibit its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary to press the thighs of the patient, those in which there is gravity and viscosity and heaviness, as they have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	When there is a variety of fractures according to the part of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	For you know that the kinds of fractures are different according to the part of the body, and a fracture of the hip bone is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the two thighs; and seemingly all other bones are different from these.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you remember the whole kind of fracture, explained in the distinct part of the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures in itself causes harm.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	For they are different kinds of bone fractures in their harm; and some are caused by an arched bone, while others are caused by the ends of the bones; and some are caused by the length of the bone: and those of the thighs and shoulders and elbows are produced either by being heavy or light, as is written when it is prepared to be written, and a fracture of the hip and dislocation in the head, and a fissure of the small bone.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	At the beginning of every case, it is necessary to make an incision or thrust in the specific location where the second memory will be found.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Symptom of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And therefore, a bone fracture is known by its twisting, the point of impact, and the sensation felt, and when you understand that with your own hands.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is no twisting apparent and no pain, if you touch the bone with the right pressure and the patient does not suffer great pain, it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It may be possible that it is twisting or a small fissure, but do not guess that you know what is happening in that location; there may be pause over it among the medicines of which some have memory of that moment at the location; and there may be stricture subtle.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	You know that this location when it is curved and not divided into two or another as does not happen in its saturation, as is the whole part of its comparison, if you guess that from your time of correction of the ones that happen at the time of the accident, you can make a cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If the wound becomes gangrenous, treat it daily until the gangrene ceases; and cut off the second toe that you can lift and amputate.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	You know that the restoration of the toe and the amputation are subject to the bone in which the accident occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And press that second toe that will be the memory of the injury.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If in the bone there are gangrenous spots, you need to extend this cut limb for several days, if it is the leg or the foot; or if it is a small member, or a cord or a cord and the thumb.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And if your position is at the place where you press the member while it is still in its natural position, and the parts of the cut limb are extended, you should know that you have to return those appendages to their original places one by one, as far as possible in their respective locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And keep watch on the other side of the thigh for the operation of your hand or injury not to occur; and apply yourself to the most effective way to use one bone against another in different forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	When it is advantageous for you to touch at that time to your own body and if you see here any different cause, adjust that and correct that according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	When there is excessive extension and compression, as when doctors perform certain operations on the body, they often cause reflexes such as drawing in the foot or tightening of the member that has been observed during the operation of their previous movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	If you can annex, equilibrate and perform the operation with proper precision and stricture of that member, and reduce and calm it; put the bandage on it and make it squeeze so that it does not cause any harm to that member in the time of its vigils and when it sleeps, and see its revolution and movement, and you must evacuate all its movements for the entirety of its virtue; and wait until the position of the member is in the position where the pain is secured that causes it when it is in the disposition of the position of the member or injury; then change that to another position of that other part where it does not feel pain; and keep it so that the position of that other part is right and unfolded, so that the member does not suffer tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the stricture of the quiet member is that which you recommend; because you know that different members are divided in their appearance and size and form according to those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	When those who are small in stature, like the arm and elbow, and resemble them, cover the envelope with a fine silk cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	For those who are large in size, like the thigh or buttock, cover the envelope with a hard and tough cloth, such that the liaison of the large member is strengthened in the entire part by stricture engagement, and there is no macula.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, begin by emptying your bowels, place the cushion appropriately for that, over the location of that fracture in three or four folds of the envelope or member; and tighten the bandage a little on that limb.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place the bandage on that part of the location of the fracture, and tighten it so that it does not strain your stricture at the location where you have strengthened the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then elongate your envelope at the location of the fracture a little, and gradually soften the stricture, until you grasp a large part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	When you take another needle and wrap the other end around the location where you want to enclose it, and see if the enclosures are at the end of the fracture; and your operation is in the stricture of the enclosure and in the mollification of that second one they have said in the first enclosure.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And pause between the feathers of a lion's stop or a dragon's if there is any winding in the fracture, if there is winding in it; and if not, do not pause in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And pause on the other needle, and engage on these enclosures slightly, if in the location there is no inflammation or post-traumatic pain, and you stop on it that sets the post-traumatic pain that reduces inflammation; and leave it for a while; and you stretch the staples.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And are the staples of the canna lada race, and they are formed naturally; or are made of pith; or of ramps of the palm; and the size of each staple according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is important that the splint placed over the fracture is not too thick and not too short compared to the other splints, and according to the size of the member; and press firmly on the splints with another wedge according to your initial stricture; and adjust the wedge according to what has been said about the stricture, and it should be your stricture according to the location of the fracture, and as the fracture extends, the stricture becomes narrower.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is important that the strings are large and subtle in size and number, and if they are large, then as you have seen in the operation of Alcus pausantz the fils of cords of the tort, and it is an error, when the stricture is equal to the size.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And very thin strings are not convenient, because you do not commit for the stricture by those you want, and it is important that there is no space between the splints.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the thighs are led by the ends of the splints according to the location of the stricture, then stop at those with a leopard or lanolin cream that does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	When some cracks in the bone are found, and there is an interruption in the column, and you will find a memorandum in the head of that second individual.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that if the whole limb is broken, it is not immediately put in a splint on the first day; the reason for this is that the limb, when it is large, does not need to be supported on the splint for more than four or seven or ten days, according to your security against the risk of gangrene.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the maneuver of the splints used by the ancients to fix them on fractures and dislocations, which are placed over the injured part.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The maneuver of the splint used by the ancients to fix fractures and dislocations is convenient for complex and especially for the thighs and ankles, where it is not necessary to apply heat or pressure: and that is why you take powder from the flour, and it is the bone marrow that must move in the walls of the mold.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you should know how it is, but do not trust that entire album of the hand, and stop the comfort of the thin or subtle one; and instead use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	1. Another application of the healing balm that soothes fractures and twists: mix equal parts of olive oil, white wine, and aloe vera from Dracuna. X; of mustard from Dracena V; of acacia from Dracena V; of aromatic amber from Dracena V. XX.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	1. All of them are placed in a mortar made of mottled material, and they are crumbly, and they are thin, either of water or of albumin of hen or of albumen of egg and they are administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	When applying a poultice to joints and bones that have been separated from their original locations, and to heal the pain caused by these separations and fractures: tie a clean linen bandage around it and submerge it in warm water with olive oil and then place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this poultice there is no true restoration, but rather a means of expelling and relieving pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another poultice for healing cuts: take fresh leaves of fig and poppy, clean them, then make a poultice from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A poultice for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the inflammation of the affected area: take equal parts of aloe, camomile, and violet flowers, flour, and all other ingredients; all should be finely ground and mixed with water, if the member does not swell.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If the member does not swell, then comfort it with that water of colin or water and use it as needed.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another poultice for quick resolution when the first one does not provide relief from inflammation: take equal parts of aloe and linen seeds, and balm, majorelle, violet flowers, chamomile, all other ingredients in equal parts; all should be finely ground and mixed with water, honey, or vinegar, depending on the quality of the member and the color of the water.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	The first source sentence translates to:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	In the region of Gualia, it has been observed that they are placed over the amputated member in the restoration and the causes in which there is a lack of moisture, such as cold, and resemblance to those causes that have been recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A plaster that soothes injuries and pain: recipe consists of mixed oils, honey, rose petals or pennyroyal, and aloe vera, and salt, divided into small portions; they are applied and wrapped, and dried, and become a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount follows the quality that covers the wound and is separated, because you consider if there is no pain, no excitement, or the limb is not broken, it is not harmful to its place, then you do not cut with sharp knives.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you feel pain at the location of the wound, violent or excited, or inflammation, then you should stop and cut that part at that time, and remove the plaster of the limb.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take drap from the limb and wet seaweed, and submerge that in cold water, and lave the wound with it until the excitement and pain are soothed; and then close the member for an hour; and place over the submerged lana sutza in violet and rose oil, and on the limb when you are sure of not causing gangrene, and to reduce inflammation of the limb, and to relieve the pain of the limb.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed to apply that subtle constriction under the skin with small and soft plaster, and gently insert it where it is most comfortable for you.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you ever notice that the sting, weakness, pain, and inflammation are all becoming more severe, and you need to apply plaster and constriction, then proceed as you have begun with the beginning of the engagement.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no harm comes to the member from those causes that have been said, then do not remove it for less than three days or four or seven; and some are completely healed in twenty days after you appear in the removal of the member, as they have said, within which time the fracture adheres, and it settles down to the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And adjust the constriction less than in your first constriction, and reduce the intake of food from the thighs, according to what is preceded by memory loss.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you ever notice that the location of the fracture has dried out and become less firm than it should be, then you will know that that nutrient is prohibited for that; and therefore, drink water according to the amount that you lose, and this should be completely cured in three days; and then apply a small plaster to the member, and for this operation, give the member nutrients, and it will heal.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When the fracture of another limb is not restored at the beginning, and it is later restored by covering, and then by tortuosity, it is an error in the operation of those who do it, and there is great fear, and if it is done correctly, the Antics will be free and will give you more or less.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	When I have not seen any of them do this before, it seems reasonable that they do not know how to do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	When a fracture occurs in the head, it is called a skull fracture.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The specifics of fractures are motions, and the figures of them are various, and the causes are distinct. Four types of fractures are caused by percussion of the bone, and the percussion stays on the entire bone, leaving the bone in its place, as it is in the fist, and for this reason this species is called "simple"; or the bone enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh and does not pass the entry through the end of the bone; and this type of fracture is called complete dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The plague of these kinds of fractures is great or small, and of those that are contracted or dislocated; and the cause of it is percussion or burning over the bone, and their appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is penetrating that has approached to the panniculus which leaves the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these kinds of fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture is that it is hidden in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species of fracture is called "capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	When a fracture is made by breaking or striking the bone and appears to be, which enters any layer of the bone in the parts of fingers, and is made in the concave location as accidences of bones when they are struck and parts of them part from the parts of fingers.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is truly made in the bodies of humorous bones, as if they were caps of eggs.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these species of fractures are thin as stars separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find in this all the pain in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you would know all these species of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry for their tendons and other flesh corrupted that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special capillary is known by that which is discovered over the bone, and it is absterged, and it is limited over the tendon, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture, consider at the beginning the accidents of the thigh, and if you see by the accidents that signify by their meaning, clearly over the parts of the belly, as if it were vomit of color, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of vote, and sincopi, and acute fever, and rigor of the limbs, and semblance to them of the accidents in larger positions, their cure is not done.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you ever encounter an unexpected situation, you should begin the treatment of the patient immediately.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of the problem is that if you came to me with the complaint as it is now and is still present in the days of winter, I would advise you to study the bone of the leg on the day of the twelfth hour in a certain position.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, I advise you to examine the bone of the leg on the seventh day, having in mind that this is already the bone that has become corrupted by the panniculus, and that accidents may occur that have been reported.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated the panniculus covering the brain, and is divided into small and large parts, I advise you to inscribe the divided part that is inflamed and torn, according to what you have recommended to me.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And is that you have identified the cause of the leg complaint, and you discover over the bone according to custom and with your hands as soon as possible according to the figure of the complaint, and that it is about the leg.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	If you happen to find the bone, fluid or gangrene, you should immediately apply pressure to the affected area and then cover it with a clean cloth. This will help stop the spread of infection and ensure that there are no further complications. Then, start by applying pressure around the bone and continue with the ablation of the affected part.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And if this is the second pair of surgical tools.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the first pair of forceps is not sharp enough, and this is the way to do it: And then insert another pair of forceps, a smaller one than the previous one; and this is the way to do it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then use the second pair of forceps that is smaller than the first one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And make sure you have several types of forceps, each with a different size of tip, and some with a sharp point that is shorter than the others, and they are at the end of the blade and are made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them for ease in percussion over the forceps so that you do not hurt the head and lead to the other one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are hard and firm, then you should carefully cut along the course of the tendon, which you will administer with scissors as the travels, which are called non-penetrating travels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	Nor is it called an axis but rather for those who do not stop at the end of the bone's term as far as that travel, where the roundness or margin is over that which is left of the cap of the arrow-like semblance, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the spindle of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that you take a great number of these travels, which are suitable for the sharpness of each bone, as long as it is present in all parts of the brain, the extremity of which is sharp, and the quantity in length and breadth is second to the quantity of spiciness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of travels: The quality of perforating in the course of the cut bone is that you place the travel over the bone and revolve it around that until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the travel to another location, and stop there where it is between all the quantity of the grossness of the ray or around that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	When you want to insert the gouge that is between every joint of the bone, and make a small pus that you can put over it to prevent levitation, as they have said, if you radiate the bone, or am your own ma, or am any other cause for those sturments which would appear at aquose, as talisans and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure that you guard all caution that the gouge does not touch any cause of the cipher.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have perforated the bone with the gouge and separated it from the cipher if continued at all, and taken it out, be sure that you cleanse and close it in the roughness of the bone that is in the os am another sturment like the gouge, but mays empero cove that the pus teon and pus subtil that the other inscissoris.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you find any part of the small and thin bones, hold it by that ease which is due to the sturments; and there treat the plague of the liver and engage those which have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The second source sentence to translate:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	It seems that the first source sentence is discussing different types of pain or injuries. Here's a possible translation:
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	When cutting the incisions of a part that has been infected with a small infection, and you are sure that no pancreas is affected by this accident that you fear in any hand, and if the physician were the full knowledge of all men and their ignorance of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If any annexation is found on the bones of the pancreas in certain places of bones, it will be located at the end of the incision that lenticular, and will be separated from the ease of the ease, which is separated from the pain and suffering.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone does not penetrate into the pancreas, and that which is separated or remains of the bone is the face of the pancreas, and the edges are rough and subtle, it is certain that those edges are rough and sharp with razors subtle for which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible to administer them to all in the correct amount of those and the right one according to what you lose your operation that cut bone and the figure of the leg.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	When you administer the medicine in your own way, use the same method for the first injection as for the subsequent ones, and do not stop until you have administered the entire contents of the vial.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In smaller fractures and subtle fractures, use the same method for each injection as for the subsequent ones, and do not stop until you have administered the entire contents of the vial.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And that is why it is not recommended to use this method on all those who have studied in that field.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And keep in mind that we have seen them used in large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the gauze is tightened when you exert pressure on the bone, then use as much gauze as necessary, submerge it in warm olive oil, and place it over the wound; and use another piece of gauze that is doubled or tripled, submerge it in warm olive oil, and place it over the first piece, so that you can apply pressure to the area without causing pain; and administer the medicine through the gauze, and do not strain it only by the amount of pus you have.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let this remedy be taken for one or two days after you are sure of no fever; and then dispense with it and administer medicines according to those which are superfluous for thirst, such as linen and flour of ergot, powder of mustard and aristology, and similar substances for them.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these powders that are pulverized over the plague, such as they are dry; and universally, administer all this medicine of the property of which it is a purgative and does not cause pain.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And follow your wisdom that the plague in your cure is not; and do not be in its carelessness or another; nor add virulence to it; when it is adjusted over the pillow of the head, corrupt that and dry that, and act on the thigh according to that malicious evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And act on the temple of the head, as the head is flayed when the care of the plague is most urgent and darkest; and if you happen to cause accidents at the thigh, consider that they are all your fault.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is not the case that black bile alone has been used, and it is due to the virtue of that medicine that caused this black bile, then you should know that I take one part of mercury and three parts of rose oil, and apply those lines on the skin; and then cure that with the specifics of curing that are appropriate for being cured.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol .iii. is a Latin phrase that translates
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When restoring the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken but rather has sharp edges or a piece of bone, or one of those some pointed pieces, because you have two bones in it, and the part you just removed is cartilaginous, and not broken, but rather has an edge, and is rough, twisted, and sinewy.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the sharp edges of the nose is broken, then you should know that you must introduce the little piece into the nose, and close the fracture with the tooth of the little instrument, and with the point of the other instrument, so that the nose returns to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not heal well, then you should cover that area with a piece of cloth that is equal to the extremity of the bone where it is slightly enlarged.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in multiple parts, then you should make it appear as if that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And what you should do for the restoration of the injury on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and otherwise, you should prop up the head or leg on a pillow and wait until the anesthesia wears off.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a cloth into the extremity of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or use several pieces of cloth, if the fracture is in multiple parts, and use as much as necessary to fill the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And I advise the ancient restorers that the cloths are wrapped in a border and moved throughout the day, without it being seen by me; having covered that the cloth is wrapped in a piece of fabric like powdered milling; and then place the cloth inside when the bone is fixed and the cartilage is enduring.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	When some worms are found in the nose, instead of snot, a piece of leopard's skin is wrapped around it; and if you have already broken the nose with great force and the lung is not forbidden for inhalation, then...
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This is not necessary for you; and if you want, make points, and if you want, make calves.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you find another worm in the nose, apply plaster to the nose with cottonseed oil or animal fat, or apply a poultice of rosewater and alcohol.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not find another worm in the nose, then you should apply plaster to that part with flour and powdered enselade album, and place it over the lion's stop, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If you break or fracture the bones of the nose, then you should cut through them and remove those that are connected to them; and after the cut, cure it with what is necessary for that, and apply plaster to it as needed.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you suffer from cold symptoms in the nose, it is customary to cover that part with warmth and administer saline drips through the nostrils.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone breaks and the fracture is not plagued, look at whether the fracture is deformed only, and is not broken in two, and is curved in parts of teeth, then its diagnosis is slightly different.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And then, if the fracture is in the right side, you introduce the left indicator into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is in the right mandible, you introduce the left indicator from the other jaw; and press gently on that to facilitate the deformation of the dentition, to the part that is deformed on the other side of the bone; it is equivalent to that.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the mandible has already been separated into halves, look that you administer extensions of parts according to right angles, entering when possible, the equilibrium of the part.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if the jawbone is broken in pieces, look that you strengthen those of which you suspect that they rattle or are made of gold or silver, and pause on the broken mandible, and on the drap doubled, and on the large knot deformed slightly, or a thread of sole engulfed along the mandible; and look for that subsequent to what you have seen the fracture and that is convenient for its application, when it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	When commanding the patient to use rest and tranquility, and to stop eating the foods that cause their stomach aches.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you suspect that the figure has changed in any way, you should cut it out and dispose of it on the third day; and then correct this and replace it with powdered sulfur, alum, or flour of wheat, which you had used as a remedy for the hernia, and place it over the scar lined with leather.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, as it is attached and adjusted to the wound, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it there, which will not be removed until it is healed and strongens the fracture; four days after this fracture is set, it will be visible.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another accident occurs after the cauterization, you should administer the medicine that has been given in the course of three days when it is healed, and keep that cauterization intact.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is infected, you should consider if it is the bone that is affected or the soft tissues, and then carefully remove those soft tissues with the medicine that is suitable for this purpose in the removal of those from the surrounding parts.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the wound of the plague is straight, then you should enlarge it according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have finished stitching those wounds and no one remains infected, then you can perform the surgery of the plague if it is wide; otherwise, place your hand over one of the dressings that are suitable for this and cover that part when it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitolium v. (Latin for "capitol
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the shoulder when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	If the shoulder is twisted, the shoulder blade is broken and the muscle is torn, it is broken in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it is broken, it is separated or separated into two parts that do not have wounds, and it is easier to restore the shoulder; or if it is broken in the wounds, it is difficult to restore the shoulder; or if the fracture is of the plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is plague, is that you should have two assistants, so that one holds the assistant and follows the dislocated shoulder, and the other extends the collar to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	When the fracture is near the end where it is felt that the form of the second bone is different and not in its eminence or concavity, then...
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you ask for extension, place your hand on the ankle bone, either with wax or cloth, and make it as large as necessary; then extend and lift the elbow and cut the spere through the ankle according to the fracture that is near the end.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot stretch the end of the elbow to the parts that are broken, then...
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The minister presses the muscle of the elbow on the parts that are broken...
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain in the elbow and muscles, then...
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is held in the bone, then...
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	This appears to be a description of the patient's body part, suggesting that it resembles a cooking pot with the concavity being the main feature; and the latitude of this part follows according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of the part.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of this part should be according to what is possible in the operation; there should be at least two ends, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the dislocation of the joint that you inserted when you removed the cartilage from the bone is wide, and it is sure to be infected, then you should adjust the lips of the joint with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the dislocation is small, or you fear infection, then you should fill the joint with draps and powders according to the amount of the joint's fissure.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you have an infection of cauterization, then inform the doctor about it immediately, and stop on that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And if the stricture of the bone when it is split and sectioned is that you stop with plaster made of flour from the album of honey, and stop on the stop of the leopard, and also stop the spera further down the thigh, if you are ordered to do so, and also pren humemate, so it is twisted like the Sarrazis, which is very long, and the latitude of the socket is similar to that of a palm or around it; and also pren pulvils doubled on the stop and the plaster; and also pren a stela of subtle table of the quality of whose latitude is three ditz and in length similarly; and also envolopa aquela in drap, and envolopa aquel drap am la stela in lo loc over the location of the fracture; and also pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, and revol aquela over the col of the leg and dejos the titillic of the leg sa and dejos the titillic of the malate, and reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, and when sometimes the stricture of the fracture is the stricture descent, and it is known that it is not hidden over you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And so, that the pelvis is not broken; and for this reason that every day you see the patient, when the limb is softened or when the stool has already become rigid, you correct this and tighten the grip.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then, stop the patient from sleeping over the neck, and stop there the titillation of the neck, so that the patient sleeps on the chest in a small pillow; for this reason, if it is possible to elevate the assistant of the patient from the shoulder of that, and thus raise the fracture of the clavicle at an elevation of the muscle; or if the arm of the patient is placed at the neck of that.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not let the limb move if it does not happen in the most suitable or apothem place, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And if you have seen the face of the patient in that place, and adjust it within the stricture and restore it, and leave it after it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comfortable after twenty-eight days, and some are seen in other men's times of that.
Capitol .vi.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	I apologize for the misunderstanding earlier. The text you provided is in Catalan, not a medieval medical treatise written in
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is in Catalan, not a medieval medical treatise written in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Here's a possible translation of the sentence into English:
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	When you cut the bone — and it is cut in its own bone location — and it is not recognized except by touch, then you should follow what figure of the fractured bone looks like and prepare for that and reduce it to that figure's natural position in the entire curve of the bone that is as possible to you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then pause over the powder of fine albumen of honey and lemon; and then pause powder of double-duplicated cloth; and then pause over the stone ladle of subtle table according to the quantity of the spatula total or less than a few.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the stone ladle is concave in the holes of the spatula's tip, then you should engage that concavity with your lemon, and it may be possible to adjust the stone ladle according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then stretch as much as possible with moist hands under the constraint of the stone ladle and its fixed position, but not to tighten the joints.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the limb in each day; and all watched that is softened, another watched and stretch the leg and adjust the stone ladle if it becomes tightened by the joints.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When the patient's leg is placed on the bed, cover it with a blanket.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and you know surely that it is of the bones from which the beginning is not confused nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the location of the pelvic bone and wipe the area clean, then you should cut it over it, and remove it, and follow what has been said in the fracture of the shoulder blade of the scapula caution if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	 The chest bone has some cracks in its own place and ends there; but the ends of the sides are not as much damaged and broken.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents when the leg is broken it is that it inclines to the parts of the fingers and causes great pain, difficulty in moving, coughing, and vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden in the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The first source sentence to translate is:
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	When there is a wound on the skin, it should be cleaned with soap or a soft cloth and covered with a bandage that does not irritate the wound. Then, gently place your hand over the area where the bone is exposed, and hold it in place as the doctor adjusts the bandage according to the size of the patient's back. Consider the wound throughout the entire process and when it becomes less inflamed, remove the bandage.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If necessary, apply a poultice or ointment to the affected area to prevent corrosion, pain, or inflammation. Remove the ointment and cleanse the area with soap and water, then apply a new ointment as directed by the doctor for the patient's curative manicure. Reduces the poultice if necessary, and adjust the tightness of the bandage as needed to ensure proper healing.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Regarding the restoration of the ribs when they are twisted.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a rib fracture does not occur unless it is in a large location where the two sides meet; and from the ends of the ribs, it does not happen to those parts except for those that are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	When I know that the patient is not suffering from the feeling of being questioned by the doctor, then...
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	When restoring the fracture, use the most suitable hand, and if it is possible, cover the broken bone with your mouth, and press and tighten the broken bone with your fingers, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is inclined towards the costal cartilage, you will experience severe pain and puncture, as if you have torn it, and for this reason, place the cotton; and you will have difficulty inhaling, coughing, and vomiting, and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the antidotes are already known by those who understand.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they say: cover the area with your hand to reduce inflammation and swelling, so that the abdomen is distended and extended, and the fracture is pulled to the broken parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We would not know this for so long if it were not for the cause of generating anesthesia, if you have not had it; and if you have had it, you have already helped with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	When the wound is closed and there is no wind, and if it seems to reason, but yet fears that the wind will direct the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	When the doctors examined them: they covered that place with linen that was previously submerged in oil cautery, and placed powder between their backs until it was filled, which was the remedy for the pain caused by the second attack; and they treated the patient's thighs with ointment made from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the pain is very severe and the patient does not suffer from it, and the doctors pierce the membrane with a puncture, they should be careful about the patient, covering the area with something, discovering the trenched cost, and placing the instrument that preserves the cipher on the previous rememoration, and inscribing the bones as they are facilitated, and extracting the one.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And if they adjust the corners of the plague's mouth, if it is large, they heat it, and treat it with ointment inside when it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If the patient has an apoplexy, you should cut and pour powder into oil rose and place over the area, and treat the patient's thighs with what is appropriate for the apoplexy that covers the apoplexy.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	When the patient is lying down with his face towards the south, enter if he is cured.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol. This term is not present in the provided text.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of restoration of fracture of the vertebrae of the two and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	When some bones in the neck break and move out of place, and seemingly also the vertebrae of the back, it is necessary to treat them with care.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	When gout occurs in the foot and you wish to know if it is curable or not, consider that if you find the joints more softened, stupefied, and dead, and it cannot be relieved by applying cold or heat, or by extending or tightening them, and when pressing or piercing them with a needle does not cause any pain, then you know that it is not curable, and in most cases it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If you feel pain in those joints when pressing or piercing them with a needle, then you know that the nail of the bone is safe and that the foot hardly benefits from cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you see the spines of the neck resemble gout and wish to know if it is curable or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that the joints are more softened than usual and gout occurs in the most affected parts, such as the knees, when you lie on your back, vomiting and diarrhea occur, and some people lay their hands on their bellies and cannot urinate, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not expect any cure for the patient.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no cause is found for those, the cause is better and brings relief.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	When the treatment of the patient requires you to sit on the posture cushion that you place over the spine, either on the side where the spine is red or on the opposite side; then sit on that side, with your eyes closed, while the posture cushion sedates the cautery.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then apply one of the comforting plasters, and stretch it over the affected area; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the side where pain occurs within that which is becoming healthy.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If the patient dies, you must open the abdomen of the os satagias or any other separated cause; then cover the belly and keep those bones; and adjust the lips of the plague, if it is large; and cure that part of the entangled intestines, within that which is becoming healthy.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the thigh of the os alhoses is cut, and there is no more flesh, then you must cover the point of the other leg in the anus, and wrap the cut bone with the other leg as possible for equal support; and stretch over the plaster and staple, if you wish to those, and stretch that one.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel wounds that are torn in that place, then you should cover it with something, and leave it there, and care for the wound as the attending physician does after it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol, Section X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the limb.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the limbs are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is not but a comminution at the extremities thereof, and they are inserted in the longitudinal and declinant to the parts of the dint; and it happens at the thigh pain in the place and puncture, and the cushion is stupefied when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of the limb is that you extend your hand over it within which is the figure of the limb above the fracture.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of the limb, then you should sew it secondly that which is on your hand according to its position within which is assembled according to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the long bone or if it already declines to the parts of the thigh, then you should make a grip on the thigh over the prepared restoration of that limb fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	When you have swallowed the pill, place your hand over the plaster, and place your finger over that layer of plaster or nail, and press firmly on the one you do not fear a puncture of fracture or removal of the staple.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	When you swallow the pill, engulf that concavity as I have described, with that which holds the stricture on equal terms, and command the thigh to lie on the side or to open the opposite side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If you accidentally receive cauterization, stop extending the arm and its restoration as soon as the cauterization is sedentary, and place your hand over that which follows that second one that precedes; and then return to the restoration of the arm, and press that area with force.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you accidentally receive a fracture or break in the bones, then treat those.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of restoring the fracture of the helper.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The helper is that which is between the thigh and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If it is broken, treat the restoration of the helper in one of two hands, of which the one you hold is the one that has a plaster of mud mixed with grass in this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	When the limbs are attached to two distant points, and it is suspended from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Follow the limb over a table; and then let go of the extended arm that has come to the joint of the limb where the curvature of the elbow is anchored.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Then suspend the limb over that heavy cause, or the minister extends it to the parts near; and then the surgeon and the fracture of the bones more severe, as the fracture returns after being covered.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other hand is that the limb be placed on the neck and suspend the collar of the limb; and command two surgeons, one of whom holds it so that the fracture of the more severe bones is released, and the other holds the end of the limb; and then extend their part to them.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be strong, hold on to the fracture of the limb and the other limb, and then extend their parts to both surgeons.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	If the fracture is approaching the end of the muscle, then you should cover that the tension of the ligament over the hilt and the other side of the fracture must be with the handle.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If the fracture is towards the hilt, then you should cover that the ligament is over that place and on that side.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Tie it as tightly and evenly as possible, and then apply it according to how much it is stretched when tied and applied properly, and if it does not cause strain on the cauterization point, then continue.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If it causes strain on the cauterization point, then loose the tie in the seventh day and place it over the moistened lanolin in the agreement and allow the ache to subside, and continue to tighten it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The tool for tightening it is that you stop plastering over the fracture and place an enveloping bandage over the plaster; and adjust the arm over that assistant, and leave your hand on the affected muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And stop the bandage and tighten over the assistant's arm so that the arm is in place of the staple, if not prohibit this for any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use needles.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place the needle over the fracture where there is a hollow and a firm pressure from other needles; and place between each of the needles the latitude of the point, and the length of the needles according to the treading of three digits of the whole hand.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And firmly hold on to the needles at the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your stricture over the location of the fracture should be tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when you elongate the fracture, the stricture becomes smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you ever notice the situation of the needles and the stricture as they have said at the time when you restore the member to its usual position, then do what you must.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an attack of gout, then remove the stricture and the needles at the day that they have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the limb in all parts for three days so that it does not happen at the place of pressure or inflammation; or diet is prohibited to reach the member because of the superfluity of stricture; and then correct everything according to what has been said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are overconfident that nothing will happen to this gout, then do not delay the application of the remedy for more than three days or less.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let his bed be over the patient's back, and the pillows be on the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand over the full pillow of wool, and consider at all times of the night or day whether the cut member is not swollen or dissolved, or if the limb is mollified, then correct this totally according to your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And stop the patient's food according to the order that has been given, in case the food is thin at the beginning, and let it be thickened from the beginning until it is tightened; and you should cover that the food of him is increased.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Fourteen days' custom of the pillow and the bed of the patient is that they are tightened; and you should cover that they are loosened and administered with bath and medicine, and those who correct them are engaged.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is laid open, you should not delay the application of the remedy for more than those days or for two months.
Capitol .xii.	I apologize, but there seems to be no text provided for translation in
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	This is a Spanish phrase that translates to "Restoration of a bone fracture of the arm." It refers to the
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	This is a medieval Spanish phrase that translates to "The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus; one of them is small and is the one that rises up, and the other is large and is the one that holds the small one from behind." It refers to the anatomy of the human arm.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	This is a medieval Spanish phrase that translates to "And if the larger bone is merely cut, or the small one, and they are very tightly tied." It refers to a medical procedure involving the bones of the arm.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	This is a medieval Spanish phrase that translates to "And if the smaller bone is cut, then the restoration of it is made and the treatment of it is placed." It refers to the process of repairing and treating a broken arm bone.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	This is a medieval Spanish phrase that translates to "And if the larger bone is cut from behind the fracture of it is bad, and the treatment of it is difficult." It refers to the challenges of treating a severe arm bone fracture.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	This is a medieval Spanish phrase that translates to "And it is bad when those are cut of the bones which are not equal." It refers to the importance of using bones of equal size and shape for medical procedures, such
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	If the bone that is fractured is the small focus of the foot, then it is convenient for the doctor to intervene, and the restoration of this one is necessary, which is made slightly larger for ease of insertion into the foot.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the small focus is very large and is broken, then it is necessary to know that the extension is made with great force.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are fractured, then you must know that you have to pull them out with great force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must know that the restoration of this one and the extension of the extended figure over a cushion, and the parts of the thighs are placed in the spaces between the others, that is what all say, and the hearing says it is placed lower than the other words, and the foot is on a cushion raised at an angle.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if a cushion is placed under it in the front or back of the foot, so that the thigh does not cramp.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And if the doctor extends the arm of the part that is placed on the chest, either in front or behind, and another doctor extends it similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	When the doctor examines the patient's joints and finds that the second best figure is worse, then...
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the measurement of the bone there are sharp points, then you must drill a hole in that place to maintain your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If in the separate bone there is a broken nail and it does not meet your expectations for restoration, then you must use another hand and take that second one from the other side.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is not in plague, and you have already made this capital singularity, then take the cauterization of that one.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you encounter an apothecary at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line a cloth made of red oil and white wax, and it should be both precise and subtle, and press the cloth tightly over that subtle opening when the apothecary is about to be closed; and then remove the cloth and take a prepared powder of clay and mud, and place a stone; and that stone should be placed on the fracture that has been filled with plaster.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You know that the number of the bracelet's stars you see in the larger positions, or if it is a fracture in one or two fingers,
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	When you find the stricture on the site of the fracture, which is very tight and very violent, and when fewer parts of the fracture or lower parts of the limb are being stretched, stop the stricture a little more than the one that follows the rememoration of the limb at the beginning of the capital.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that cover the fracture are not very hard and not rough, and the one that fits best between subtle and thick is the one that has been recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Consider the member and the limb according to the appropriate days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If you happen to encounter any cause for which rectification is necessary, be as promptly alerted to the member's condition and hold it with your hands so that the water does not enter when that impulse ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	If the member does not contract within which it pauses, and then return the stricture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the extension has already been softened and the bone has been made stronger and appears to be like this, then you should correct everything with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Consider if the nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to superfluity of stricture, as these doctors cover that it softens a little and lessens it over several days after running into it with the nutrient, and applies it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If nothing happens to the thighs from those causes that have been said, doctors do not cover that it is slid within approximately 20 days or out of those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And if the thigh is suspended by its excellent movement of agitation, and make it sleep on the soft side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	Do you know that this fracture is restored in approximately 30 days or 90 days, or very well in 75 days, and then it is followed by the disposition of the complexes and the dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the thigh bone and of the teeth.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Do you know that the thigh bone and the teeth are very fragile, and they do not break except by violent motions seen.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When it happens to the patient's leg fracture or dislocation, you should cover that thigh with a cloth and make sure it is evenly covered, and then stop the leg from moving in that extended position.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then, the surgeon extends the broken bones and places the screws on those that are in good condition with a good congoncio.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And if it does not happen to the patient's pustule, do not use cauterization; and then stop pressing, according to the quantity of the area, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the sprain is in the fingers of the palm, and you make it look like a glove, and command the leg to hold that with its hand, and your glove is long enough to cover it; then your glove will be long enough to cover it.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the bandage is on the hand that is lifted, because the hand is applied to the palm; and then hold it in place.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the parts of the fingers, you should cover that and put another bandage on the part that is still in the palm to make it straight and tight; and then stop the stricture, as it is revolved around the ring between those limbs.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If an injury occurs to one of the bones of the nose, if it is broken, then if it is possible, cover it with a piece of cloth and hold it with your hand, and if you wish, make a small bandage around it so that the fracture is not aggravated and does not become worse.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in another bone, as in that of the elbow, or in the ear, or in the anus, then cover it with a piece of cloth and hold it with your hand, and if possible, continue with the same continuation, and it will be better; or place your hand over that small bandage, as they have said in the poultice.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and as soon as possible, the disposition of the application of cautery and oppose — as in the second operation — I say that it covers when any cause is encountered, according to the narrative of the story.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of a nose bone fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the nose that are sawed are cut and declared to the sense according to what is converted into the parting and the pus that is sucked.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the part is made in such a way that one limb is placed over the fracture and another limb after the fracture, and the thigh is made to lie on the patient's stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the surgeon extends all the limbs to their full length according to the quality of the bone in the fracture location.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is necessary to reduce the swelling of the ankle, then the limbs should be placed at the angle of the joint, and the other limb will extend to the part of the patella, so that the extension causes it, and the other limb goes over the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the fracture is reduced to its proper position, then the limbs should be placed at the angle of the joint, and the extension should be made to the parts beyond the fracture.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the surgeon engages the bone with the joint as much as possible to reduce the swelling that follows the natural position and the bone is united by good union; you should cover the plaster and stricture, if not cause harm to the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If you happen to have an aposteme (a type of wound), you should clean it every few days until the aposteme has closed, and then return to your healing routine.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The stricture of the wound is as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it over itself two to three times, and reinforce it with tape; and then enclose the incision within the bandage when it reaches the knee and the ankle of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And introduce long needles between the thigh and the bandage of the denol at the points of departure, and let the extremities of the needle come out through the opposite sides, and then revolve around the bandage and the thigh as much as the bandee has overlapped.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place your hand over the thigh at the location of the fractured bone, and place a stone on the bones of the bandage.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the spaces between the bandage and the thigh with cloths, so that the wound is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And begin the stricture with a firm bandage over the location of the fracture in three or four layers, and as you get further away from the location of the fracture, your stricture will become looser and less painful.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	When extending the hands of the womb to the parts inside that have reached the cavity of the foot, and tightly holding the extremities of the other part so that the limb does not remain in the wrong place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And stretch it over that, so that it does not happen to the corrosive or post-operative scar, or to the swelling and distortion; and if it happens to any cause of those, then cut me out of this part, and correct what has happened entirely according to what has been said.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is pain from that which is placed, then you know that this second one is possible for you; otherwise, cover that part with something and leave it, and cure that which precedes the remembrance when it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And if some guidelines are tightening this fracture of the thigh or another one that is adjusted to those bones, then according to what has been said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of that, it does not happen to the thigh claudication; and if it is restored alone or another one that is applied to the other camba, then you need that he claudicates that which was applied to it.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the thigh is tense for 40 days or a few months, and this is due to the diversity of complexions and other structures.
Capitol .xv.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	I apologize, but the text you provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in Catalan, a Romance language spoken in
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in Catalan, a Romance language spoken in Spain and Andorra. Here's a possible translation of the sentence: "You know that fractures of the pubic bone are common, but they often
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in Catalan, a Romance language spoken in Spain and Andorra. Here's a possible translation of the sentence: "If an injury occurs to this fracture, it is usually a fissure or tear in the tissues, and that is why it is painful or not, and the entire area feels uncomfortable.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in Catalan, a Romance language spoken in Spain and Andorra. Here's a possible translation of the sentence: "And the restoration of the fracture is such that it seems broken as if it was torn from the parts of the bone due to the fact that it is attached and connected secondly that it is possible by equality and ease and facility and production.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And if you stop with plaster and place it on that round stone, if you need that; and then tighten it as much as possible.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the arrangements that have been recommended for other fractures, as if it were a postmortem examination and similar to those that occurred when it was opposed to total accident, but now it is convenient to enter because it is healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the femur.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the thigh there are two bones of which one is large and is called the femur; and the other is small and is called the patella.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if you notice that the fractures of the bones of the thigh are similar to those of the two bones of the arm, and for this reason the restoration is made in the same way as the restoration of the arm dislocation, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you press two bones together, the thigh is converted into all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if you press the small bone together, the thigh is converted into the parts of Denant.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	If the pelvic bones are compressed, it causes pain in that area, and it is due to those causes that you are not aware of.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, flexibility, and stretching of the muscles according to that constraint.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the thigh is not accompanied by movements of the limbs, then extension should be tighter and a little more, and it will be better for your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if there is any cause of operation on the arm, and it happens when you tighten the screws and that makes the whole operation complex, then you should take hammers of copper of which they are placed next to the causes that were placed in solitude, and those that are very sharp, and not for the hands, and it is the length of those according to the length of the thigh, and from the denol inside the hole.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then cover over each drap in folds according to the length of it, and place one over the edge of the thigh of one part and the other part of the other part, and they are from the denol inside the hole.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	When you have placed the three largest bones of the arm in three different locations and at the middle location, this structure is forbidden by clinical practice on both sides and left, and it is done for good reason.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And has already been administered an ointment of pitch on the longer side of the joint; and it is placed in this joint to preserve that of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And I strongly advise you not to do this on fractures, and when it is really necessary.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And consider in each joint the bone and study it carefully, and you will guard against gangrene and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of these occurs, you should immediately stop what I advise to prevent further harm.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not usually break completely; rather, the bones of the foot and toes have some breaks, and the toes do not break, but only twist in their position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	When the bones of the foot are broken and sometimes these bones rise above each other, then you should place the thigh on the ground prepared as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place a bone on that which is raised from those bones, and cut those, and pull them out, and turn them in the places where they enter.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place plaster and bandage, and then on the belly of the foot a small table with two pieces of plastic.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then stretch that on the foot as much as possible, push it down with clothes and other things from which you draw it.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, you will remove the bandage, and then you will find the bones dislocated or broken, and the operation on those will be done with care.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If the knees are said to be dislocated, then you restore them and pull them out as you have been taught in the restoration of the ones that you mentioned in this.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then stop the second dislocation after the length of the one that was mentioned, and put a little oil on it; and then place the foot on that table which you have been recommended, and stretch that as much as possible.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	When the joint is compressed by two or three or more bones, then place your hand over each point of its amount enveloped in a leopard skin, and stretch the table under the base of the foot, and hold it steady over one of the caps of the table for the stomach of the foot so that it holds well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to overlook that you do not consider all the causes which are said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that have been told; and delay your opinion until this accident is fully known.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone of the female and the penny loincloth bone and the groin bone of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone of the female is compressed, then make that cut in that direction, and bend it slightly towards the other end, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And if the midwife makes the thigh bone of the horse, and make it in the thigh bone as she hopes; and if the woman is in labor, and raise the two ends of the little one by little, so that nothing is forgotten inside that it is within the part of the thigh bone as she hopes and the compressed bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powder on the back of the patient, and when you need to urinate, make the path easier and remove it, and reduce and return that second pillow to the first one that was previously placed, and return the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And fast for seven days or until you are recovered, then that one will be restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take once a day one cup of olive oil and press on the abdomen of the patient a canula of wax; and enter the whole vesicle into the cavity of the patient, and instill air through the canula as soon as the vesicle is inflated due to the cavity, so that the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with dung and stay for several days after they have recommended it, until it is cured.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bones of the knee or hip are crushed, administer in the restoration and wash with the water that has been recommended for the bone of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that water is not hidden in these proximal fractures and does not end much, mainly to the one who studies and uses this free method; so that this fracture means to you in the largest possible way during the restoration and stricture of the joint, and therefore understand be.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the man has a fever, take garlic from any place, and put it in that; and cover it with the cloth of the dress, and wrap it around, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are damaged.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one in which the fracture occurs, and especially if the bones are large, such as the thigh bone or the supporting bone, or it seems to you that you cut and suture that much so as the conditions of suturing are the same as those you have heard.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague effuses, you should cover that you cut you at the retention of the excess that you powdered over the edge of the sliced piece, if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And begin to restore the fracture in that day, and do not extend this, if you do not have a stroke.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If you have a stroke, you should lay down the restoration of the fracture in that nine days, after it is cured, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, until you make up for the bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone protrudes above the codpiece, you should cover that and cut it open with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not prepared and the equilibrium of the bone in your hands is not stable, you should reduce that with your hands and this tool; and this tool is made of iron, its length is seven or eight fingers, and its latitude is according to the quantity of the fracture; and for this reason, the surgeon must take these three or four according to the quantity indicated in the treatment throughout the species of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be reduced, and there should be little resistance by you so that it is not bent at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have sharp ends that are marked in the extremities; and it should be the desus of the bone with the greatest tendon, and the largest part of the bone should enter the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the form of the tool:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	When the end of the bone is raised above its end, it is called a prominence.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press that within the vein as it returns to the bone and be sure to tie it with any equal.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And try to tie the ends of the fracture together, and if the end of the bone is slightly cut, and not hold the instrument for good exception, you know that you have inserted the end of that bone inside that instrument has power to do this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone of all that has been recommended, insert it inside that which is closest to you that corresponds to the bone of those incisions that have been made; or cut that bone with one of the knives in any way that is possible to you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And pay attention to those that are rough and have sharp points.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced and the pain in the thigh becomes very intense, you know that the bone is not returned to its natural position; then do this so that you can confirm with great joy.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed your restoration work that involves the bone, and you submerge your hand in the black sterilizing ointment, and especially if it is summer, and you do not put anything on the infected part or any other cause that might be there, so as not to aggravate the wound or cause further harm.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And at the time of the middle of the restoration of the bone, and leave the infected part discovered as it is, with incisions made by the surgeon and used according to the amount of pus.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take great care not to strain the pus at the fracture, as four waves may occur, and it is better to have the badly healed or rotten bones removed, which can be painful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the stricture was tighter, it would be softer than the strictures of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the pus is large or the pus is bad, and you fear about those accidents that have been reported, and pain in the area, then do not think that you have to put anything on that, rather use fewer dressings of hard cloths in place of staples and press them on to it.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the plague has begun to appear, which is generated by the cold humors that have been infiltrated into the body, then you should take off the clothes that were previously placed over that part, and apply calguas, which are medications that we commonly use to treat the plague, and look for tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It seems to me that you should gently slide the limb and consider the plague in every day and evening after it has been solidified and closed, and cover that member with such preparation that the dressing runs from the end to the parts outside without difficulty.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If in the plague there are several days that have not yet been solidified and has not been separated from the limb, then you should know that here are signs of small pox that you should be concerned about the plague in order to treat it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those signs to those that are separated and extraxted, those that are not separated and put the member and cause pain, then you should insert yourself after me to see what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you happen to fall into the plague or dysentery, it is likely that you have an infection or another form of corruption and putrefaction. In this case, it is necessary to cover the wound with a piece of cloth that has been previously treated with the remedy for the disease that was previously described in the capital.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from that, cover the wound with a piece of cloth that has been previously treated with the remedy for the disease that was previously described in the capital. When it is large, you should place your hand over the member as if it were the thigh and the helper, and seem like those of the large members, and do not presume to attract or extract anything from it, nor the extraction of any watery matter that may occur for that death; let there be enough of that within, where the urine is excreted, which lasts about 20 days or 30; and you should treat the plague if you have seen it, and if not, let there be enough.
Capitol .xx.	Capital.20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of a fracture that occurs in the dressing of any bone.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Mucus discharge occurs in this fracture in the dressing of the surgery for the fracture, and especially when it is near the joints, and is treated by the figure of the member; and very much you forbid the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	When considering whether the pain is recent and being administered in those medicines that have been stitched for issues such as inflammation of the skin, eyes, ears, and nose, and also for headaches and gout, and semblance to those; some people may take some or all of them, and comfort them with those that have been stitched for inflammation or albumen of blood, or for agreeable humors, and place them over the pain in a stopper, and bind them around the pain with good confinement.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And the stricture that does not allow it to be lifted for those days; and if it is not lifted, then do so until the pain subsides; or press on the lamina of descentment, four ploms have proprietat of remaure totally aquo that is inflated in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the pain has already been converted into stone and is being treated with necessity, and you cut that part per the part of the inflamed pus, and incise the superfluity and eminent, or ratz that part am alcus rezoris if it is remauguda; and cure that within which is sane.
Capitol .xxi.	I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text is not in a
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When treating a fracture that has been restored and is approximately Roman in size, and the subtle member does not follow the natural side.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and if the member is subtle and thin, then it is necessary to use only such causes: those of which one is a multitude of solutions for the limb and the ligament of the pain does not follow that it is covered; or due to superfluity of stricture of the limbs when nutrients are prohibited from running to the member; or due to superfluity of embrocation; or due to movement that is not in its time; or due to lack of sanctity in the corps and delicacy of the.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The translation of the source sentence is: "The treatment for this condition involves massaging the thigh, making the patient stretch their leg within that area where the pain is multiplied; administer hot baths; and apply poultices of herbs over the affected area.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a bandage on the member, so that the bandage attracts the nourishment, or continues to irritate the urine, if that nourishment corresponds and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol Section 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the treatment of broken bones when they are repaired and it is forbidden to operate on them, as they have been covered.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a member that has been repaired has an injury of the same kind as the broken bone and is covered with bone, and it is healed in that form, but the member is not prohibited from natural operation, if it does not cover that word that existed in that bone, then it is of new trinity.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Fewer have been the doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is considered very dangerous by those who fear the hand of that which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodification are recent, it is considered that they are covered with water of the urine in which the feet bones have become soft, as those are fuels of aloe and earth and mint, and resemble those; and it should be made with the same plaster as the mollificatio of aloe is made with; or that it is a greed for the grease of aloe and it is mixed with the gray of guaiacum or olive oil, and is applied to that; or that they are fatty figs and are twisted with the femmes of the colon, and resemble those of the medicines that are named for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	When some women are dissolved by frequent rubbing of the more humid parts, and the member is moved in all directions at all times, it is called frication.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If tortuosity is already present and becomes hard and converted into a stone and necessitates medical care of the joint, you should cover the pus with a piece of cloth and stop the continuation of the bone, and it should be cut down that superfluous nodation of those metals in the bones that are cut subtly with an inscissor, and there should be facilty in that am the sollicitut e studi.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	A sermon on displacement.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is an accident of one of the joints of the lower limb, for which movement is forbidden, and the figure of the member is ordered to come over the thigh, and great pain and large lesions are caused to appear.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when an accident occurs in the case of dislocation, you should pierce as much as possible to reduce it, and do not delay in reducing it, for if it is delayed, the location becomes apathetic and very difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	When there is no need for blood to be drawn or stitched during the operation, four waves of pain are felt that bring on spasms and pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	If this occurs, then you should sit with your back against the labiotomy of the thigh, and place your hand in the space where the incision is made; and have the member embrocated with warm ointment and oil, and have it reduced for ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all parts of the body are treated with this to bring relief from the pain that will come in this place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the capsules of dislocation according to what is preceded by fracture; from the beginning of the skin that is separated inward to the end of the skin that is separated outward.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the jaw on the outside.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the mandibles are dislocated and do not heal, and the dislocation of the teeth is caused by either of two factors: if they are only slightly pulled out of place with little movement and then softened a little; or if they are completely dislocated and compressed, so that they are softened at the joint between the thigh and the knee, and do not hold their mouth closed and do not clench their tongue, and the tongue is wrapped in the pouch.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the displacement of the joint is slight, it returns to its original position for no apparent reason.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the displacement is complete and well-made, you should make a reduction of the swelling immediately and not delay for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And is that the master holds the head of the wound, and inserts the knife between the two teeth of the jaw, if the dislocation is in one part; or that inserts his two fingers into the spaces, if the dislocation is in several parts, and the others say that they are deformed by those who engage; and commands the wound to stop its mandibles and release them from any parting; and the knife uncovers the jaw and removes the jaw when it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, and especially if the mandibles are found to be dislocated, you should administer an eyewash with water and oil, immediately if a slight reduction of the jaws is made, and do not delay the reduction of the jaws of the entire jaw, as those who have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and close their wounds, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not chewed, then place your hand over those powders of scented silk, and use some of candle wax and rose oil; and then you will find it easy to remove the remaining pieces.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And if the patient lies down on his back, and his head is placed between two ears, so that it does not touch the right or left side; and you do not force any cause; but if the bedsheet is forbidden by the leopard, then when the pains are relieved and the jaw is not gnashing, you can then take what you want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this is easily administered, and you do not work on the edge of the mouth, but instead feed the food and drink and chew, if the jaw is gnashing and healthy.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	E if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at some time and not converted into their proper places, then use your eyes carefully to avoid fevers and frequent sweating, and the stomach of the patient is often distended, and the stomach and vomiting are pure.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you see this, you will know that it is lost; and those who have seen it will know which one it was that happened to you in those days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder is not dislocated from the axle of the wrist due to its continuous movement in the chest; and some are dislocated at the beginning, and this is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of that which was dislocated, which was placed on the inside of the thigh and extended the thigh bones.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And make sure to cut the place with your thumb with a strong cut, so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place your hand over that plaster and powder and press it down.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The end of that which is cut with the bone is not dislocated at any time; you must know that it has been reduced and healed according to what has been said and according to what appears to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand over that plaster and powder and trim it, and command the wound to adhere to the skin and to heal as soon as it is healthy.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	This reduction of this curative measure reduces the tip of the muscle when separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	in Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's the translation of the first line:
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that this muscle is not dislocated unless by three ways, of which one way is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the thigh to the end of the foot.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second way is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the muscle, and that is called sprain; and it is not dislocated in the back by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the inside by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And truly it is dislocated and deformed and it sticks out at the end of the thigh, and truly in those where the bones are few, it is not dislocated; rather in those where the large bones are, it sticks out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people are harmed by blows or burns, and the muscle of the leg is stretched with a stretching cauterization, and it is stretched because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	And I advise you to come in when you are over the service of the leg, and proceed with the cure of the leg.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And you know that the dislocation of the leg is when you have to touch the end of the thigh with the toe; therefore, you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the flexed one, because among those differences you will find manifestations; and you touch at the beginning of the concave muscle and at the end of the thigh with the tip of your finger, and in the foot you cannot reduce it to the heel, nor can you bend it for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the joint is dislocated and needs to be reduced, and you make deep cuts, it will not be painful.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is made with a slight reduction when it is fresh and the thigh is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of the joint is that the doctor raises the leg of the patient to the parts on either side; and he places his hand over the hip, and raises the joint with strength in its new position, and the doctor raises the leg of the patient, and extends it there; and he places it down afterwards so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return, and as from the beginning the dislocation was serious, days pass, and you notice that the thigh is swollen with cold blood and is maintained in a soft, linen bandage, and milk, and water, and it is administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And if the thigh is rolled over the back and is placed down afterwards the hip expects wool that is between lifted and stricture, and the doctor places the sole of the foot on the spine, and raises the head of the muscle with strength, and holds the thigh of the patient with his hand so that it is not painful in the parts on either side, and another doctor holds the head of the thigh, so that it is not painful in the parts on either side, until that returns to its original position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish, reduce that second person: and it is that you are presenting a man who is long than the thigh, and is from the side of that latch, and enters the muscle of the buttock and raises the buttock of him to the parts where the thigh is suspended in the air, and another servant takes the thigh from the parts where it is.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the thigh is swollen, then you should cover that with something else, because it is more serious than that, for which the dislocation returns the most.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced and treated with another hand: and if it remains in the ground a long pole of its head, which is like a mortier, that is neither big nor thin, and places it next to the thigh; put that it is placed over the cap of the pole with the leons, and the thigh is standing according to the length of the pole, and extends the hand of you to the parts behind the other part; and extends the part of you from the other part to a fortaleza, for which the joint returns to its original position quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the joint by all the causes that have been said, then use this treatment: and if you take a pole of the quantity that is in the long of two brasses, and its latitude is four times, and the largest part of it is placed in the top of the tittilic according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	When one is about to place their hand on the head of the patient, it is necessary to cover it with wet cloth so that it does not cause pain to the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then place the hand on the patient's shoulder and extend the arm or arm over it so that it does not cause pain to the patient. Make sure the hand is visible to the assistant and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the hand on a scale according to the latitude, and extend the arm to the sides, and the rest is suspended from the other side, so that the joint can be accessed easily.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the gout of the joint is completed according to your ability, and you make sure that your hand does not press on the shoulder of the patient; and cover the wound with a layer of powdered ginger and almond oil over the entire muscle, as much as it can rotate, and strengthen the head of the joint with stricture, and the limb is attached to the plaster, and the hand of the patient is connected to the collar of the arm, and it is less, and not harmful to the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When the patient's food has been taken, if the member is comfortable, then it is appropriate to put on the medication.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if the food is given in larger amounts or exercises are performed, and it stops but does not become softened, then one has already been healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated, motions are made due to humidity that occurs at that place or by another cause, then it is appropriate to apply cauterization with three needles, as it is said in the capital of cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if everything is done and it takes about three days for the limb to slide and the joint does not close, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over some parts, and it does not close and cannot raise that arm to the parts desired, then one knows that the nerves of that muscle, which are at the top, have been injured or extended or softened, and one knows that the joint will not stay in place for a long time.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is made, the chest and breast or the parts behind are reduced by traction and extension to the maximum, within which it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When the other stricture is administered and the entrance that is healed is cured.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If the wound becomes severe in the member and the movement is slow, then use the bandage of vegetable oils that enters where the severity is relieved and returns to the original nature of the first part.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of hip dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and most particularly in the part where one part meets the other, and the dislocation of the hip does not occur when you stretch or stretch the knee from the side or from the opposite side, and when you adjust the dislocated hip joint, it is clearly declared to you that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch that one muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover those parts and reduce the dislocation as much as possible so that it comes to the posture of the cautery, where if you see the cautery, it is difficult to reduce it, and only partly healed; and especially when you reach the rear parts, where many other kinds of dislocations occur with great pain and vegetable oils are applied to that one.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When restoring the body, when it is possible to reduce, it is that the body of the patient should be extended as much as possible, and the arms should be expanded, and the hands of the physician should be over the thighs and feet, and he presses on the joint with his fingers or thumb at the ends of the bones that turn in their place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is to the parts that bend, then return as it doubles the body over itself, within which it presses the thigh with the tip of the thumb.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not comply with the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arms, and hold them with those two ministers so that there is no weakness due to extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And if the shoulder is turned, it should revolve completely, because it unfolds doubled long over the body of the patient or limb.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, apply some ointment for that which helps those causes that facilitate the joint's lubrication; and press the joint with a strong push within which it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And if you want to reduce the cover that is placed over that bandage made of albuminous powder and is sterile and has an effect on stricture descent, and the arm is suspended from the collar, and it is left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And if it is slid; and then, if the joint is formed in that location, you should slide the limb of the patient and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see that the joint is not tightening, then you should apply more plaster and wrap the limb, and leave it for several days after it has been stretched; and then slide it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you happen to fall and the reduction of the joint is complicated and the position is in motion, then you should apply moisturizing cream on the body and gently massage it, and compress it when it is released; or rest over the joint that is relaxed, so it is the heavy part of the body; and then slide the limb, and leave it on the knee and ankle.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that and put it in the bath; and when it dries, you should apply pressure to the joint with tempered friction, and then slide it over the relaxed joint, so it is the heavy part of the body, one leg, and the other, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you want, stop on that wet and slippery cow's horn and press your hand over it; and make some holes, pull out the wet part and reduce it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	The text you've provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When someone's bone is dislocated from their joint, and the reduction of the displacement is slower, and the opposite joints are less urgent, however, it depends on the speed of the reduction in the hour in which the dislocation occurs, since the place may be edematous or may occur in the edema cauter.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the displacement of the bone is that you place the joint of the thigh over a table and extend the knee of that, and the hand or palm is placed on the hip, and push it within until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider if the palm has already been placed on the abdomen of the thigh, then the hip pauses the two of its hands over a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes the two of the hands, then the position of the hand of the doctor should be placed on that intrinsically on the table, so that the hand of the doctor covers the immediacy of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if you return quickly, well; and otherwise, you stretch that arm as much as possible, letting the edema go down; and do not wait any longer, for if it does not pass within those days, you will not be able to reduce the displacement of the bone.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. And allow it to rest and be stretched for several days; and gradually and gently exercise it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of the intestine is not stopped and causes pain in the area, you should apply an ointment made of honey and vinegar to reduce inflammation and swelling.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of joint dislocation.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some joints are dislocated in their entirety.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a joint is dislocated from the fingers or abdomen, you should stop the movement of the joint and push it back into place, if possible.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	When supporting the head of the patient, and holding it in place so that the affected part is aligned, and leaving it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	When you suspend that and extend it inside so that it goes through that hole on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	When the patient is not moving, read that second passage in the narrative, and do not stop sliding it on the day and exercising proper movement, and then again; and keep doing this for several days until it becomes straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If it seems like this is working, if it is dislocated in the abdomen and lies in that position and performs the first operation within a few days, it will become healthy again.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	If you seem to be getting better when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the treatment of displacement of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When you injure one of the vertebrae of the back or neck and have other vertebrae that are dislocated in the same place, if it is not treated properly, death may occur at the scene.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And this is why the patient's will is outside of their control, and they cannot hold back; and if you see that the member of the patient is softened by cold or by changes in the body or by the bends of the spine, or by a spine of that part, then see if the patient's will is softened and if the patient's will is made to move four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	This has already become swollen in the parts behind and is not gaining any relief.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure of the patient is that you should consider if the swelling is due to inflammation, for in that case there is no cure and in that case it is not curable or curable for all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in the event of pain in the chest area, there is neither treatment nor cure for that; and seemingly in the case of that which is done to two lumps.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those are not cured except for those that occur in the two areas you recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient's thigh is extended over his face with a pillow close to the part, and it is extended further down the leg so that the chest is not pressed against the patient's leg.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And a firm knot should be placed, placed in the ground at the end of the thigh around the head of the patient, and another knot in the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	He should hold the knot, and not be stopped in a hollow; and another person should hold the other end in that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	When the head of the patient is covered with a pillow and the legs are held firmly, extend the extremity of the blanket to the foot that you need to treat, and tie it there; then tighten the other blanket over the ankles of the patient's legs, and adjust all the blankets and tie them to the other foot that you need to treat.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The minister then extends the blanket to the end of the foot, and does not make the two ends and the blankets of their own legs rough, but rather continues to move as they have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places his hands over the spine for strength as he returns, or places them on one table, and adjusts the tables over the patient's feet as they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If the doctor does not return in this way, then you must take a table where the latitude or longitude is three degrees, and dig into the wall of the one they have said contains the patient at the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And he pauses the table on the spine, and the servant places his feet on the other end, and he carefully comes in so that the spine is not twisted and returns to its original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the wound that was turned inside out, and it is necessary that you stay on land with the cap of the thigh at the end of the pug of two fists, the length of which is a hand's length, and the cap must be at the end of the pug except for one fist, and the length of which is a hand's span between each fist, and it should turn in each fist as it comes out, and none of them should be hurt on the ground.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let me make one fist larger in the wound that is turned, and it should be twisted in the two ends of the two fists.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it, there is a cavity in which the fist is formed, the length of which is a hand's length and is turned as aforesaid; and in the other two fists, it resembles this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And apply the strings that you have straightened in the chest of the patient in the truss that you must place on their head, and the strings that you have straightened in the thighs of the patient in the part that you must place on their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And each truss must have a master who straightens the truss according to its size, and the surgeon should insert the spines according to what has been said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the truss:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And push the spine back and return it to its place, and then wrap it with a bandage that is not too tight around the album of the hand, and then stop; and then place over the bandage a table of which the latitude is three degrees or more, and the longitude is the quantity that takes the place of the yellowing, and over the end of the spine put the sa.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the string is loose, and use the patient's food subtly when it is healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if you see any signs of inflammation in the place at the end of the cure, then cover that the medicines that are applied and linen are administered according to the table for a long time, as recommended; and it has been administered in that place the lamina of plum.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	When some swellings occur imminently in the lower back of the spine, and it is due to dislocation; and that is the cause why they have not yet appeared for fear of being harmful to this medicine, which I advise you to add to your treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the cure of a Dislocated Ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not always mean dislocation, but only happen in those cases where dislocation occurs in other small removals and concavitation.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And when the ankle joint is dislocated, it can be due to four causes: either the parts of the fingers are dislocated, or the parts of the feet, or the parts of the toes, or the parts behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most often, it is the fingers that are dislocated, and less frequently, the toes or the back.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the dislocation of the fingers is that when you adjust the thigh of the healthy leg, it is long and the knee is pushed out of its place, and the leg cannot bend the elbow, and it is the location where if you press on the elbow with your hand, you will feel a popping sound due to a popping sound from the cautery, because the end of the thigh has already come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The first line of the text translates to: "The cause of that which causes injury is in the parts that are unnatural, because the accidents of that are against this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When a joint dislocates due to injury, the surrounding muscles and tendons expand, causing pain in the affected area. However, this pain does not necessarily indicate an injury; it could be a normal response to exercise or other physical activities. If the dislocation is severe and cannot be reduced manually, medical intervention may be necessary. In such cases, the patient's urine should be retained, and the blood should be allowed to clot. The attending physician should then perform a reduction procedure, carefully manipulating the joint to realign the bones and reduce the dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	When a joint dislocates due to injury in the rear parts of the body, it is because the muscles and tendons do not expand, nor can they be folded back to engage the joint. The joint is also more rigid than usual, and the head of the thigh bone is displaced from its normal position. In such cases, a reduction procedure may be necessary to realign the bones and reduce the dislocation.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	A more successful reduction of this dislocation may be achieved if the injury is not too old and has not been previously treated, as the joint may have become stiffened by previous attempts at reduction. In such cases, it may be necessary to perform a more aggressive reduction procedure, such as traction or manipulation, to achieve a successful reduction. However, if the dislocation is severe and has caused significant damage to the surrounding tissues, it may not be possible to achieve a full reduction.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	When the dislocation is recent in that particular joint, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you should cut along the path that you want to follow for the dislocation and extend it to the parts of the fingers and toes, and also to the parts of the chest, and it should return to its original position without requiring any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If the dislocation does not return in this manner, then you should prepare strong force and extend the joint of the finger or toe that is farthest from the hand, and also extend the limit of the joint to the ends of the thumb; and apply pressure to the tendon on the side of the cushion, and hold another member at the end of the tendon.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is extension of the finger or toe to the wrist to the elbow joint, or to the back of the thumb to the back of the other hand.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it is extension of all those in one direction, and the leg is raised above the ground and hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If displacement returns, then say so; otherwise, do what is necessary for the entire specialty that speaks of its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the joint, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the parts of the fingers, it is necessary that the thigh be bent over the foot; and another person pauses the limbs on the side of the thigh in the place where the head of the thigh meets the place where the leg is left; and extends the limb from the part of the shoulder to the other part of the wrist.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And if another person firmly grasps the handles of the patient's thigh, and presses the wide part of the thigh against the patient's hip and extends the parts of the thigh apart for extension, then it will return to its original position.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this special treatment is to push the member that is reduced with this species with the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you excuse yourself and do not obey the entrance of this species of treatment for the entire body, then you know that the two thighs of the patient are held with strong, firm limbs, on the sides of the ankles and on the sides of the knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each of its parts is equal to the number of four, and the thigh's arch is extended more than the other by two degrees.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	When the patient's leg is suspended over the edge of the bed, and it is in the most comfortable position; and the length of the leg is the quantity of two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a young man to tighten the cuff of the thigh, and suspend it at the top of the bed, and another young man to loosen the thigh at the strength-exerting part, so that the joint returns to its original position with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when there is a dislocation at the wrong part, make sure that the bed follows the second order of the glutes; and hold the limb firmly over the correct hip and chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	If two pillows are placed, one under the foot and the other under the head; and if the pillows are adjusted to the side of the pillow that is most comfortable for the humors, so that the bed is not pressed by the pillow being between the thighs of the patient, because you have to extend to the parts behind it, the pressure will not be sharp.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each physician extends his hand to his patient's part, and he cuts the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If you obey the reduction, do it very well; and if not, pause carefully and listen to what they said in the book about that tightening.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Moreover, this disease often affects the thighs, causing pain.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation is in the joints, it is important to extend the camber slightly, and follow this method according to this narration; and the physician places the palm of his hand on the thigh, and the other hand on the opposite side, and that extension is stopped at the joint of the other leg.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is behind the joints, it is not necessary to extend the thigh to the other leg, and raise it on the ground; having in mind that it should be stopped over a hard cause, listen as the pain says if the ankle of the other leg is dislocated in the wrong joints, according to what has been said about the sprain of the ankle over two ankles; and over his face and the limbs are extended, according to what has been said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When the joint pain is being treated with pressure from a table over the location where the joint pain is located,
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, when the joint pain is being reduced by pressing on the table over the location of the joint pain, — and the sign of the reduction is not clear to you, and it is that you extend from the thighs to the knees, and when you see those engorged and the thighs extend the chamber and expand the same excuse, then you know that the member that was reduced — and you adjust the thighs and put the cushion under them and extend the bandage and press on the abdomen so that the waist is not too tight in any of the parts; and hold the member to the table for three days or for four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And if the bandage and the cushion are removed, and compare one chamber to another.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those engorged in the thighs, then you know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the member go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of softening, then you return and apply that, and extend that second time after your first stretch, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	When you approach that area, and make it wait in the bath for a few days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol.xxxii. is not a complete sentence or phrase, so
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: first, it is dislocated at the front parts, and second, at the side parts, and third, at the back parts that are less than the rear parts; and the front parts are not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you command the thigh to apply its cushion to the leg; you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the shoulders is that you make a cut on the thigh, as if it has extended the thigh bone, if possible; hold the two ends of the shoulder against the chest of the patient, and place the hand between the shoulder blades and tighten those between the shoulder blades and the shoulder of the patient for strength, and another minister extend the thigh bone as soon as the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When it comes to relieving the patient's pain, it is because their limb is held tightly by the thigh and cannot be lifted without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And apply an ointment to that area and hold the bandage tightly to the thigh, and apply those empyems with a needle for three days or four, and then remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the surgical forceps for more than a day, as soon as it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the knee is your responsibility, then administer firm and extended care to the ligaments that were treated in the previous surgery.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes slips out of place due to slight displacement, and sometimes it becomes dislocated secondarily, and the dislocation of the ankle is caused by the dints or the dents.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the reason for the dislocation of the ankle is that sometimes the ankle swells due to the part where it was dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	When the treatment of the removal of the part is of slight importance, and it is that it is extended as much as possible to the most difficult and that it is returned after it has been turned.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	When the treatment of the dislocation is not very important when it comes to the second part, and you should take care of the thigh, and hold it with a strong and powerful minister from the part behind the other in your own location of the patient.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if you have your hand on the second part of the toe that is being cut off, and your left hand on the other part of the foot, which is behind the toe in the location of the cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And if you tie the foot to your hand with your right hand, and hold your left hand with two fingers, and extend your left arm; and pull the chest of the foot with the other hand, so that the bowel works its way through the cavity.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make cuts according to how many there are.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And pull the chest of the foot through the second cut, and you are in the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If you return through one or two cuts according to this method, and if the foot comes out, it is good; and if not, continue working on the operation, waiting for that to return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are not allowed to reduce the joint pain that has been recommended, then make a warm poultice of the affected part on the ground, and place a cold one on top of it, and then cover the buttocks with a damp cloth so that the poultice does not come into contact with the joint.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And the minister of the joint should hold the buttocks, and another minister extend the foot over the patient's thighs or limb that lies over the collar of the foot; and extend this to the extent of the thigh part, and the poultice is placed between the buttocks of the joint retained there, so that this does not come out of the parts further away from the foot, which you must maintain its extent.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor examines the dislocation of the joints, and another minister holds the buttock firmly in the parts further away, so that the dislocation returns to ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and is declared to you as the health of the reduction of the joint, then stop plastering and extend it as much as possible, and tie the foot to the chest.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	When one fears or wishes to guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, because the cord over there is not strong and firm.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	When the swelling has reduced by about half in two or three days, and if the limb is softened, remove that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If the patient is afraid of going into that space, it is not safe to assume that the dislocation is not over the dissolved and corrupted part, and accordingly, it should not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you encounter this caustic application, know that you should administer in the diarrhea of that water in which we have previously described our narrative, in another place of cure and dressing, as soon as it is available.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol, Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the joints of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Know that the dislocated part is only slightly engulfed by its extension; and that it is not difficult, a little less than a finger's width.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the two toes of the foot, know that you should cover the foot with a cloth so that the toe is on a place engulfed by the earth or on a table, and be as if it were not there.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	When you are near the foot, and pause the tip of the foot on that which is intended for the joints, and then carefully apply it to the foot, so that it returns to its original position, and you see that it has engulfed and does not appear in the eminent part of the location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And pause the abdomen of the foot of the patient on a table that grabs the entire foot, which has two caps, and tightly stretch it evenly for three days; and then remove it and make it return to the fissure through walking for several days, until it is stretched and secured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitulum .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the causes of displacement that are called plague, pain, or fracture, or any other injury.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you encounter one of those causes, and you are in the treatment of that and its restoration, successful cases are seen to die.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore it is not presumed that the cure of the patient depends on long experience, but what is known in the art, which is long-established, merciful and pious, is slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and it should be used at the beginning of medicines that only give postemas such, and lessen the suffering of the body, rather than on that to which one hopes for salvation from loss, or for the alleviation of the malady, in which there is any hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then you must spend so much time on him reducing the swelling at the beginning of the cause, because it will eventually turn into gout.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the member returns as soon as you want, administer the appropriate regimen that reduces gout and cures the inflammation of the affected area as doctors recommend for the drying of the patients.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is mistaken for fracture and occurs in the separated bones of the shoulder girdle, you must perforate the statement of those, and make sure that they have said in the simple diseases of that part what has been prescribed in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid after your virtue that intrusion in the ways of fear following what you have preceded by my preaching; fourth, it is better for you to please the true Creator, and less permanent for your glory, and less salutations to the one who sees those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	This is the end of the lines of Albucasim beautifully of which God is not benefited.
Amen.	Amen.
