Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	In the first source sentence, the text seems to be discussing the limitations of knowledge in ancient times and the importance of understanding the science behind it. The phrase "fort leu peric la sciencia de lu" translates to "with great concern for the science of ours," suggesting a deep respect for the understanding of one's time. The phrase "le vistigi de lu es ostat" translates to "the vision of ours was left," implying that the knowledge of ancient times was preserved, albeit in a limited manner. The phrase "e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics" translates to "and we did not make it bigger than some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients," suggesting that the knowledge was not expanded upon but rather preserved in its current form. The phrase "les qualus mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio" translates to "those who destroyed the most and sought to fix those errors and misconceptions," implying that the knowledge was not perfect and was subject to human error. The phrase "entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	This sentence seems to be discussing the importance of maintaining an orderly structure in a treatise, as well as the need for clear language and concise expressions. The phrase "yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio" translates to "you should maintain that order," suggesting that the author believes it is important to follow a specific structure in writing the treatise. The phrase "e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra" translates to "and because you come to those forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work," suggesting that the author is referring to specific tools or methods used in the treatise. The phrase "cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu" translates to "as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of you," suggesting that the author believes that clear language and concise expressions are necessary for the reader
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In the past, the cause for which an artisan was not skilled in surgery, but in our time, it is because the science of medicine has not yet been fully developed, and the actor does not know that the body is subject to the laws of anatomy, which Guillaume discovered when he knew the functions of the members and their forms, as well as the connection and separation of those parts; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their kind; and of the pulsating veins and quiet veins, and of the locations of the deposits of waste.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	For that reason, says Iposcar, who is his name, not in the small work, but rather in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	As I have already said in the introduction of this book, what we do not know about anatomy is not due to ignorance of that science, but rather because of errors in it, which have caused many deaths among men, as you have seen many of them, who are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When a physician observes a woman with a gout attack in the thigh, and notices that several arteries in the thigh are flowing with great pressure, causing the woman to die suddenly among her friends.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	I saw another physician who believed that a man's gallstone was causing his condition, and the gallstone was large, and he came to me and said that the gallstone had been passed through the urethra, because that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	I then called for help to remove that gallstone, and I saw that the large size of the gallstone and the position of the thigh under the patient had caused her to die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	I saw another physician who was paid by a duke of our land for surgery, and he went to a black trap that was on the thigh of the patient; and the physician, being ignorant, opened the fracture, over the blood, am pulleys and astels am strong strain, and did not close the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	When the movement follows the will of the doctor, and the relief, and the pressure according to the joints and commands that he desires the limb to move; and it is estimated that the thigh and foot are in position, and then the pain appears.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And you called upon him, and the movement of the limb appeared, and there was calm and relief from those pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, I already confirmed that the corruption was confirmed in the member, so he could not stop the spread, and it continued to spread through the member within that bad position of the thigh.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	I saw another doctor who performed an incision for corns, and it ulcerated after a few days, within which the cunning of the lord of the foot was revealed.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this pain is that the cramp is purely due to melancholic humor, and it does not come to the relief of the lord of the foot, but rather it is in the member that suffers from all that has been hosted.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	Therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation I made on you be divided into two parts: one is in the operation associated with health, and the other in the work in which I hold in the greater dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	When I have already existed here in this free place where there is an operation in which errors and fears occur; because it is necessary for you to guard this and lay that, so that the people do not fall back on speaking and disobedience to you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And then remember your own weapons with care and the protection of God, and your wounds with difficulty and closure.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through the grace of God to lose one's life and praiseworthy succession, and lay the terrible wounds of difficult cure, and keep your weapons ready that you may fear, so that you may not escape from your faith and name: for what remains is for your glory, and put up with everything in the world and beyond.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Many false things have already been said.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	 "Do not treat wounds badly, because evil men do not speak the truth.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	 And you have already had to do this free work three times.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	 Begin the division of this free work, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first source sentence translates to: "The first chapter of the doctor's entry into the foot, in the forms of the instruments and the methods of cauterization, and that which is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	This line can be translated as "The division of the second part." However, without additional context, it's difficult to provide a
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	This line can be translated as "The second chapter, of drying and perforation, and of ventilation, and of plagues, and of extraction of tumors and similar growths, is divided into forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	This line can be translated as "The division of the third part." Again, without additional context, it's difficult to
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	This line can be translated as "The third chapter, of restoration and displacement, and of cure of bending and similar growths; this chapter is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	This line can be translated as "Of cauterization, with fire or acute medicine, and reminder of the operation." It seems to be discussing the use of cauterization in medical procedures and the importance of remembering the specific details of the
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	This line can be translated as "At that time, the treatise begins with the free part." It seems to be discussing the structure of the treatise, with
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	This line can be translated as "You ask about the quality of the advantages of that cauterization and of the notes of it, and in what collection it is prohibited to cauterize." It seems to be discussing the benefits and drawbacks of cauterization, as well as any restrictions on its use.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, it is said that the quality of the cauterization and its effects are long and prolonged, subtle yet clear, and secretly magical; and many wise people have spoken about it, and those who disagree with them are few, and for me, a little of their words suffices to fear a long duration.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	I say that cauterization soothes the entire complexion universally, which is made of matter or its matter, except for two complexions, which are female complexions.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the female complexion and dry matter, decadence occurs; others say that cauterization is beneficial for that, and the others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable for malnutrition, which is due to its quality and dryness, since nature of the fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that malnourished female complexion and dry matter are cauterized and dried to be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I agree with those who say the opposite, that through cauterization, it is beneficial in all female malnutrition and dryness that appears in the chests of men, where when you compare the chest of a man to the focus of his humors, the chest of the man becomes less.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And you say in the sermon of that, I have already experienced this in my own life.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But mayhaps not that comes to mind about that which has been expropriated and exercised in the capital of cauterization for the exercise, and knows the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of their malnutrition in their meats, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complexes, there is no cause for fear, and particularly in wet and muddy diseases, such as gout, all doctors are accustomed to this, and do not deviate from the common practice of cauterization in these cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Indeed, children, that the secret of healing by cauterization is in the fire and its goodness, they say that cauterization is the most important part of medicine, as it is simple, the effect of which does not reach other parts of the body except for the part that is cauterized and not the other parts adjusted only for small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Less the effect of burning medicine reaches the parts of the body that are not cauterized, and more it comes to the difficultly treated part of the body and more it hurts.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Indeed, the fire, due to its sublimity and goodness, does not cause harm unless it is superfluous. And we have learned this by experiment and long experience in the study of the art of truth; and therefore you are excused for the length of this sermon and if not for the freedom of this moment in your secret of the fire, and the quality of the operation of the focus in the body and the expulsion of the excrement that expels the diseases, the philosophical sermon is demonstrated, which sharpens your mind.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	When it comes to wisdom, sons, that they do not follow the time in which it is most convenient to perform cauterization and wait for the best time from first aid.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I believe this is a passage from a medieval medical treatise discussing the use of cauterization in various situations. Here's my translation:
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	When joint pain is not alleviated by your own hands, or, sons, it is not valued as the common people and doctors claim, it is because the remedy for that disease, which is cured by cauterization, does not always work immediately, and time is needed.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The reason is not that they are treated for this, but rather because cauterization does not work in the place of medicine that changes the complexion and dries out the humors that cause the pain to come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, cauterization is often used over medicine because of its superiority in value, virtue, and the greatness of the Lord's service.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the disease may return at some time, according to the complexity of the disease and its location in the body, and the virtue of the patient, and that which is prepared in the heart of the patient by the addition of superfluities in the patient, and that which has been acquired in the patient through his adventures and likenesses of those causes; but if the disease to which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a small member and few superfluities and humors, then it is possible that in it there will be no return of the pain, rather than that it happens in little.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	This is a common speech that describes cauterization as an ancient remedy in medicine, and it is called a surgical procedure. However, I do not fully understand what is being said here, as the language used is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I believe that the author is trying to convey that cauterization was not a cure for all ailments, but rather a method used in conjunction with other medical treatments.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	This sentence seems to be saying that the cause is in contradiction to what I understand. I believe that the author is trying to convey that cauterization was not a cure for all ailments, but rather a method used in conjunction with other medical treatments. The author also mentions that some medicines do not cure certain diseases, and that cauterization is used as a last resort to alleviate pain.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	This sentence seems to be saying that I should understand that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not based on my understanding of the common people and many doctors. The author is trying to convey that cauterization should only be used as a last resort when all other medical treatments have failed.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	This sentence seems to be saying that the ancients believed that cauterization was better than using iron, and they did not discard this method only because of the inequality between gold and its substance. The author is trying to convey that cauterization was used because it was the best option available at the time, despite its limitations.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	When deciding on the location for cauterization, ensure it is not too close to the body, as it may not be absolutely effective. If you have already done so and found that it does not work, try another location in another part of the body, and cauterization is better than a sword if you have the means; however, when you perform cauterization, use gold, not iron, as it is more suitable for the pain you want to relieve, and prepare the ferrule; and if you place it over the ignition point with the gold on fire, and there are some layers in the focus, the artificer will have to work in that area.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And therefore, for cauterization with iron, you must gently and precisely place it on the operation site.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And you have already ordered this capital in cauterization according to the capitals, and ordered those of the foot within the feet, so that the patient can easily understand which one he needs.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Cauterization for head pain due to coldness and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	The first capital.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers humidity and coldness on the accident of which its causes are due, causing soda and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the thighs and ankles, and numerous sleeping, and toothache and gout, and universally of all maladies that come from coldness, which are paralyzed, sore, apoplexy, and seem like those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this, which first commands the patient's leg that it be evacuated from the body by surgical means, either three or four times, according to what is seen in the virtue of the leg and its age and its habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then commands that the patient lie down with his head on the table, and places his hands over his eyes to prevent them from coming out.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pauses the head of the patient's hand on the tip of the nose between his fingers.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, as the said place is said to have been done, it should be attempted there, and you should ignite the olive-colored cauterization oil of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	When that is paused over the location without any resistance, with your hand that descends, it is held by the tie that tightens little by little, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Lift your hand lightly and look at the location, and if you see any part of the skull exposed, then as much as the amount of errors, raise your hand, and if it does not turn the iron that is on top of it, take another one from that, if it is frozen, enter that if you have seen the skull as I have told you to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a small amount of salt and dissolve that over the location and stir it for three hours.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then pause on the cotton that is wet in the border and stir that over it when the skin of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And treat the location with tetracycline cream when it is healthy.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it has been said that as much as the Roman plague opens the throat, so many bees get into the chest, for which it is better and less hurtful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they say to the ones that the cartilage in the bone is burned inside and it is held with the cauterization when any part of the surface of the bone is burned.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	When the joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Other doctors use a blunt cautery that is applied to the skin, and it is inserted into the strong bone part, and this is the method of alopexy:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate that the vapors of the head will escape from that place.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	If the wound is kept clean for a long time and it is cured when it is solidified, then...
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these specific types of cauterization before, only in the case of fearful men; and that is why, if you want to improve your health, when you can, let the head be divided by a solution of continuity of the skin as has been testified in other parts, and especially when the head of the patient is of natural nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of cauterization is less safe and better for you, and from that I believe that it is better for your health.
Capitol segon.	Next chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of head cauterization.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the entire head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, and it is located in the pelvis prolonged, and one uses thorns, spikes, and purgatives, and plasters, and gauzes, and bandages, and garments, and semblances, and more so if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not cause inflammation in that particular cause; and the head of the pelvis is not of great origin in its nature; and there is no swelling or great flesh, one should consider that the cauterization was done with another cautery further on.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And if it is necessary to cauterize it over the crown of the head with a cautery that has already been placed within the umbilicus, when the abdomen is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The abdomen is incised and the quantity of bone that has been found is revealed, and it is cauterized with a cautery in the part of the head closest to the Vas, — and that location is where there is a ventosa.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And afterwards, and you leave the wound, and do not discover the bone, for the pelvis suffers greatly from a different kind of pain than that of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	You should direct this cauterization to that location, where the cauterization is done on the corns of the head and the occipital bone, and a subtle cauterization is made on the same location of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Capitol ters.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of non-ancient cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When in the part of the head pain occurs or is felt within the wound, and if it is necessary to remove from the head a foreign body that has been introduced into it, and to maintain the other cure, which I have told you in the cases of diseases; and do not neglect, cauterization on it can be done in two ways: either with acute medicine burning, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Many cauterizations with acute medicine are done when you take a heated iron, and hold it over the edges of the wounds of the caps.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And you should pay attention to the location of the pain in the temple with a lancet that has been inserted into it, entering where it is located, and entering where it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And apply pressure on the affected part that is crossed by the constricted vessel, and leave it there for three hours; and then cut the vessel and remove the plague, and place the cotton submerged in the border of the wound that the location has.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the affected part until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see, apply some medicines that I have written in the book of burning medicines in the aforementioned treatise.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The cauterization is made with irons for cauterization, and this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a nail head, where the top of it is shaped like a needle and has a curve, and in the small part of it there is a pocket.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And place your hand over the painful spot, and remove the iron little by little, and roll the fire slowly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of iron that is burned by the particularity of the codon is slow, and you remove your hand, and you do not allow the artery to be burned that was previously, in order that there may not come a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	When the doctor applies a warm poultice of salt to the affected area and leaves it there for three days, and then replaces the poultice with a new one every day, and cares for the patient accordingly as they become healthier.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you see, make a point on the extremity of the intestine according to the cauterization, and keep an eye out for the cutting of the artery in this unusual way.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of ancient emigrant cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure the ancient emigrant according to the previous treatment and what has been said in the divisions of the diseases, and do not take advantage of the treatment, and sometimes for the disease that does not suffice what has been said in the first cauterization of medicine or the cauterization of fire, you cover that you ignite the cauterized intestine at the location of the pain, or that is the longest of the line from which the largest part of the gut comes; and then slow down your hand for a moment and press it firmly over the incision of the artery and pass it through to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	The first source sentence translates to: "However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is harmed by chewing, and that the lizard is not hurried and the nerves that cause that, and that it does not expand spasmodically.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	If it is about the custody and caution of the flow of sinews from the artery that is blocked, then in the beginning of the artery there is fear, and especially to that one who does not know that it failes and does not study and does not practice; and therefore the operation is left in the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will remember the regimen of the flow of sinews in case of an accident to the artery according to the right hand side, in the location of this free one.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you see of this malady that it does not satisfy this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that part of the head with the leg in the middle of the arm as they have encountered, and cure the plague within when it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery that has said in the capital of stretching of the artery with an artery cautery with two points, and this cauterization is better and less inconvenient.
Capitol .v.	Capital.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of the pains of gout.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the gout there is pain from cold and it is cured by causes lactic and by the other cure that I have said in the division, and it does not worsen the pain, then you should administer the cauterization, and this is the one that I have called the point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And if a point is made on the thigh, and it is placed at the edge of the entire auricle, as a wheel rolls around, or in the circuit of any example if the pain is in any part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Then use the cautery on the edge of the auricle as little as possible, so as not to damage the location intended for it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery is made on all parts of the auricle, and it is removed, and the wounds inside are cared for once they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capitulum.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Chapter.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The first source sentence translates to: "Turpentine stool that is cured and treated with cauterization is not only of the species that come through the rectum, as has been said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	This sentence appears to be discussing a specific type of cauterization, which is a medieval medical procedure that involves burning a small area of skin with a hot object to treat various conditions. The term "esquiva" could be translated as "evasive" or "avoid
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that part of the scalp with dandruff and flaking, and if it does not improve after your treatment, then you should cauterize the thigh three times: first with the tip of the cautery, second at a distance of one finger's breadth, and third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	When stopping the cautery for the opposite side of the malady part, four mollifications do not seem to be in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that part of the cauterization at the end of the extremity of the swollen finger, and on the other side, the length of which is the same as the length of the said pous, and then your hand pauses until the quantity of the matter of the specified part of the codena is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of cauterization, and it is special for the barber, the form of which is set on the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is less subtle that this one has a few less eyes; and cover that a little more than the excessive gluttony has.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And apply the remedy to the place where this is done, coming after the process when it is healthy.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When ancient apoplexy is and the treatment is done as they have said and no confirms your medicine and the thighs do not have fever, then you cauterize that part four times: on all the corners of the head; and on the head, you cauterize where they have said; and on the crotch.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The hand of the cautery is made according to how it is described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is less dry; and it is properly cared for as you proceed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitulum VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization of forgetfulness, it is made by flax.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover them with large and small poultices and pills that are useful for the thighs at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And take away the head of the thigh and place it on the center of the described plaster in the chapter of the plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And put that on some wounds, as that is the hand of the cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to those measures that I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if for those who are cured, do this; and otherwise, make three cauterizations on the same part of your head, which are going down from the top of the head to the top of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And put between each cauterization the largest part of that, and properly care for the cauterization as it is proceeding.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	After treating the affected area to make it healthy; and if the cautery is not effective, then use olive oil in that form as was given.
Capitol .ix.	The given text is in a language that combines elements of Latin
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in English and appears to be written in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's a possible translation of the given line
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	This line appears to be a continuation of the previous one and is not complete. However, based on the context, it seems to be discussing the process of cauterization for head wounds and the use of cauterizing instruments such as cauters, cushions, and other tools. Here's a possible translation:
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the malady of softening of the chest of too much flesh and the chest is hard, then you should cauterize that with four cauteries on the spines of the back, and often with cauterization within which is crushed by the end of the rib cage, and lift the other arm.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And if it is cared for inside that it becomes healthy, and this is olive cauterization.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized the epileptic unless that epilepsy is by cramp.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore you should change the brain of him at the beginning of the year and at the beginning of another cure, and in the division when the malady is great and the tolerance of the exceptions of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the child who did not suffer from the medicines, then you should administer guarssants and stimulants to the changed serum, and for this by several days, for the good of the vessels.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And if you cut the head of the patient, and then cauterize that part with a cauterization iron in the previous location of the head, and another cauterization in the occipital region of the patient, and over each corner of the head, you can cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the patient is strong and enduring, then you should cauterize those parts that I have mentioned, which will have practically and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And the cauterization is olive according to what has been said before.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is young, then you should pause the subtle cauterization according to this manual.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol, Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are humid and corrupted and largely flaccid, then you should cauterize those parts that have been mentioned in order to have parallelism.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity and declines into melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then you should give him this that modifies the brain of the patient according to what has been said before in division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And cut the head of the wound, and make a clean incision around it, and then pull it slightly towards the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	If the wound is sixty centimeters long, and it is held tightly from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And place the liniment; and it is worthy of being bound with woolen threads.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire, carefully heated to measure, which the patient endures when they are in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And place that in the middle of the head of the patient, and let it enter until it is warm.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And apply a dressing to the wound once a week, or as the other part of the body becomes healthy; or if you prefer, cauterize those points with small burns according to the size of the wound, unless you have a properly ordered cauterization: this is a specific type of cauterization that moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And place that bandage either around the border or in the gray matter of the quail.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	When the cauterization of water descends into the heel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you are declared the beginning of urine in the urethra by the senhals which I have mentioned in the division, then start and give in burden to the thigh at that place where the head of the penis is located, and keep it for all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And keep that swelling wet in the bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And command that the head of the penis to be shaved, and cauterize that part with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and if it is the beginning of gout in two hills or one, then cauterize on two flaps if it is the beginning of urine in two hills, or on one flap if it is the beginning of urine in one.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise all the veins and arteries that you have left in the abdomen; and those cauterizations are in that line in the templates.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep away from the fluids of scorbutic when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluids of scorbutic, stop the application of that part for any medicine that you can possibly find.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And when you come to know the quality that is extracted from the arteries and the abscess of those and the caution of the fluids of scorbutic,
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	When some people are cauterized on the neck, two bones are produced at two points of the cauterization.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitulum XXX.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and appear in the veins and arteries that are located at the base of the head and it is observed that there are too many twisted flaps, then cauterization is performed on that part with a pointed cautery that has been found in the capital starting from cold water in the eyes, and two cauterizations are made in the neck at two points and two cauterizations are made in the neck at two points.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add, then cauterize that on the entire length of the horn above the tip of the small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitulum XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cauterization of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate that which has been said in the division and do not profit from your medication, then you should show yourself and give to the patient's thighs three kneelings; and remove the head of the patient, and cauterize the am cautery with the olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	When it is necessary to apply cauterization to that pointed cautery, apply cauterization to both sides of the hairless skin over the area.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And keep away from the archery that does not burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the pointed cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cauterization for the softening of the eyelids of the blind.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the blind is softened by malady or humidity, apply cauterization to that eyelid with a pointed cautery; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	 And if you, apply cauterization to that over the two hairs with a small one on each side of it, and make them long by the hair.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	 And the length of each cauterization is according to the quantity of the hair.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	 And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the part of the eyelid is swollen.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cauterization for the eyelid of the blind when the eyes are converted into parts of the fingers and thumb of the hand.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the nails of the fingers are converted into the parts of the toes that pierce the finger, a cautery is applied in those with two hands, or it can be made or made with medicine as burning.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use fire to cauterize the part, command the patient to look at their fingers as they were before, and if they are prolonged and engulfed; and if the finger of that one needs to be cured, then stretch the nails of that finger with a needle so that it does not cause pain when they were born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are prolonged and engulfed, place the tip of the patient's nose in the middle of the eye, and cover the eyes of the fingers that you want to treat, and cover the eyes as the second figure of a skull, and that is the beginning of the covering of the nails.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And place a cloth or mucilage on the finger.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And light the cautery that this is the form of the fire.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize over the figure that you have covered, little by little, in quick movements, when it is burned the surface of the nail that was like a skull, the whole apparent perfectly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	When examining the second health of the eye, you will see that the eyelid is swollen and the lashes are raised, so make the puncture in the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then raise your hand and lay it on the side opposite to the wound, and place your thumb over the edge that is exposed to the air.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply a cure to that part which is healthy.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the lashes return to their proper position and the eyelid is softened, then make another cut over that area as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the lashes are in the eyelid, then make a cut over that area where it is raised at the natural location and is not causing pain to the eyeball.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	The cauterization in medicine is this that you command to the thigh where the lashes are extended and engulfed, and it should be in the form of a flat piece of paper like a mirror's frame.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some boiling water and add live ashes to it. And then mix those causes with it, and make sure it is not too hot; and spread that over the paper that is in the form of a mirror's frame, and place it on the other eyelid; and place the thigh in the bottom of the album, and the hand of the thigh should be at the top.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	When the patient has paused the medicine and placed it on the cheek, the doctor will give a small dose of medicine, which is taken in the same way as a hot pill.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then, when the pain subsides, take the medicine and put it in the same place as before; then, when the pain stops, wash your eyes with water; and consider if you have washed your eyes before or after the constraint of heat or cold, which is what you should do; and if not, return to the place where you did not take the medicine and do not damage your operation and do not contradict the eye.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And when the cut is stopped, treat it with the same medicine that was used to eradicate the fistula, and cure it with the same medicine that is safe or another if it is not safe.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary for you to do your operation, guard it with the same diligence that you have in the eye not to fall out of the medicine, and if the eyelid is softened and any cause of the tears is in the eye, return your medicine to the place where the eyelid is softened, and do as you did at the beginning, and leave it when it is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of the fennel plant.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	You should know that the symptoms of men vary according to their age and size, and therefore the treatment for your contraction is different.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Do not doubt the route to rectum for the one who is being studied in this work.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol, Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Regarding the cauterization of the fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure the fistula as they have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confirm your cure, then you should cauterize according to this method: order the disease to place the cap where it should be in the upper part, and hold the cap of the patient between the upper parts in such a way that it is not too wide or too narrow for the patient's head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then stop cutting in the fistula with a knife or in the scar tissue of the eye on the patient's eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you light the cautery that is this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	the which is cured, how it is formed like a cane or a pen of the hand, from one end to the other, where the cauterization is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you see, enter through the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	If you want to try something different,
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	When it comes to treating joint pain, it is generally better to consult with a doctor or a healthcare professional. They can provide a proper diagnosis and recommend appropriate treatment options based on the individual's specific needs and
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if you open the fistula when it is opened, and between the soreness and dryness, then.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not opened, then open it and remove the redness of the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place your hand over the wound with the cautery that is not lit, and take care of that joint but a little of the cautery at the end of the nose, so that you do not mistake the joint and the thigh is quiet, and then place the cautery in the gray part of the nail and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if the cauterization begins to enter the bone, then so be it; and otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization one or twice, if necessary; and leave it there for three days, and place your hand over the area to border and envolve it with the cautery until it is dry inside, and it becomes healthy.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If it takes more than three days and is not cured, then you should stop using the acute, corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is rough as it should be in the capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	When another cauterizing instrument of the fistula is needed: locate the fistula and find that one, and then pause at that small opening in the subtle groove where the form of the penis is; and fill it with a quarter of a pound of melted wax; and then close it with a good retention, and do not damage the penis for so that the wax does not enter the end of that; and cover it over the end of the penis with a damp cloth or water, where four pounds of wax adhere to the fistula and heal it for wonderful cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed as they have said about cauterization and cure, then so be it; but if not, you must administer snuff of nose and reduce the fistula to the cheek according to what is found in its place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterization of the vaginal fissure can be done.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Masturbation causes fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	When you treat those fissures that have been said in the divisions and do not waste your care, then you should use a small cautery according to this form that has been cut:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	When the swelling of the foot is caused by the subtlety of a puncture.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	When treating that wound, make sure it is properly cleaned and dressed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	From cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the uvula, tongue, or palate in the mouth has a sting, and it becomes inflamed and breaks, and it bleeds and forms an ulcer, and you treat it and do not overdo it, as much as possible, you should cauterize that area and not let it become infected, and you should use your own judgment about how much fire to use according to the amount of inflammation in the ulcer, and place the fire in the opening of the ulcer, and then put your hand over the wound when the hot fire touches the inside of the mouth, and on the outside; and you should care for that wound as they have told us about the cure when it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the abscess is healed and cured, then so be it; and if not, you must discover the location and cut the corrupt bones according to what will come in their head.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterization of teeth and mollification of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are dry, and you treat them with medicines and do not confirm, you should pause the thigh of the patient in the second position, and place the fire in the desired form, as if you were pressing the fire on the tooth and entering it with the cauterization hot, and then put your hand over the wound and a little further down that the leg is centered by the heat of the fire on the gum that has been perceived.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	When you take your knife and make several incisions according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And the patient should drink water with salt and hold it for an hour, and it may be seen that the gum is closed and the gingiva is strengthened and the corrupt humidity is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitulare de Cobutonensi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Treatise on the use of cauterization for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by cold, or if it is frozen, or if it is infected, or if the medicine does not provide relief, you should make incisions on the tooth with two knives: either with a knife made from cowhide, or with a knife made from fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with cowhide is when you take leather from a cow and heat it in the furnace, then wrap it around the end of the hand, and press it firmly against the painful tooth while it is cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And make incisions according to what you see as the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you see, place wool or hair on the border of that part, and place it over the painful tooth, and also place it over the heated iron that comes into contact with the cavity of the gum.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, I believe that the cauterization is only suitable for the end of the nail or iron, and it should be done in the body of the foot, and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then, light the cauterization in the form that will be used, and place it over the tooth and insert your hand inside to see if the cauterization is hot; and make some observations to see if the pain remains or on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And I advise that by pressing the cauterization, the patient's mouth will open the good doorway and hold it for an hour and a half, and this is the form of cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as you see fit, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	The text you provided is not in the language of Latin, Italian,
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	It appears to be in a language similar to medieval Latin and Italian. The text you provided seems to be about
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the extremities are caused by spasm and cold humors and are not obedient to digestion, and you see that the digestion is only mildly affected, then you know that the cauterization has taken effect in the form of this one, and you have two ends for the cautery, so that the smoke does not reach the other end, and you place the ignited end on the other wound with a veil, and another if you wish, until it reaches the edge of the wound.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the gout is small, then stop the cauterization according to the amount of gout, and apply it for three hours and leave it on the affected area in order to make it less painful than what it is now that has been burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And apply this ointment and try to put it inside if it is cured.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the canula or cautery is like this.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitulum .xxiii. (Chapter 23)
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of vaginal wounds and constriction of the anus.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humors come over the anus of the lung, and especially when it is cold, then make sure that the abdomen is emptied at the beginning of medicine with laxatives, and cauterize that part of the gallbladder in the damaged location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to get burned by the cauterization of the gallbladder or not burn the colon of the patient only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that part with another cauterization, you must make points on the joint of the col in the corresponding spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The first line of the text translates to "And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery." Here's the translation in English: "If it is
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And if you apply this remedy to that part as previously described, it will be cured." Here's the translation in English: "And if you apply this remedy to that part as previously described, it
Capitol .xxiiii.	This line appears to be a page number or section heading, not a translatable sentence.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cauterization of the chest in coughing." Here's the translation in English: "Regarding the cauterization of the chest in coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When the cough and chest pain are caused by cold humors, and the chest does not have a fever or chills, and it is an old-fashioned cough, then cauterize that part with two cauters on the shoulders in the locations mentioned earlier; and another cauterization at the side of the chest between two milks; and make the cauterization clavilh according to the previous form." Here's the translation in English: "When the cough and chest pain are caused by cold humors, and the chest does not have a fever or chills, and it is an old-fashioned cough, then cauterize that part with two cauters on the shoulders in the locations mentioned earlier; and another cauterization at the side of the chest between two milks; and make the cauterization clavilh according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish, your cauterization should be made with a point on the cautery that is called a point, the form of which precedes in the pain of gout.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And points should be made inside the wounds; and it is important to care for that which is preceded inside so that it may become healthy again.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now the cautery has three notches for each cauterization: you can make three cauterizations following this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitulare Bollandianum, Book XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization of the gout that is the head of the assistant.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to the humidity and does not stop at the time of returning to its original position, and then it is dislocated by making a small movement so that it goes back in the same way as we have witnessed, first reducing the dislocation, and then the thighs are placed over the knee or on the bed; and then lift the codpiece that is in the part of the gout to the parts where the fingers were before, if the joint is dislocated at the parts of the fingers.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to use cauterization with two heads; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And if you need to cauterize the umbilical cord that penetrates into the other abdominal cavity; and this is the figure of cauterization with four heads:
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And according to what follows, depending on the number of attempts; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some veins are adjusted according to this count and by which these are the cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place your hand over the cauterization point, and make sure the patient is tightly attached to the bed, and the limb does not hurt for any time until it becomes comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation occurs in the parts above and below, then you cauterize over the muscle that is to be cauterized or the point where the cauterization is made, four times the joint is confirmed and the moisture is relieved and the patient is cured.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain is felt in the stomach and moisture enters that particular part of the body, and if you continue with your cures without conferring, it is possible that the leg is over the head, and extend your hands and feet, and cauterize that point three times with a single cauterizing iron: one iron on the chest for the quantity of a single cauterizing iron clavich, and two irons on the two costae of the cauterization, when the figure of the triangular cauterization appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted to make an incision.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of the two thirds of the groins of the coecum.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if the figure of the cauterization is this form, and if you want, cauterize a large cauterization on the right side of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cauterization according to the circle form according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is cauterized at the point that is feared from this cauterization: and it is that you are on the stomach with a point according to the quantity that you want attempted, and cauterize that point of the cauterization at the points; and cure that point with the cure that was preceded when it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a language similar
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the enemy's foot." This phrase suggests that the text is discussing a medical procedure or treatment involving the
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When joint pain is caused by cold, humidity, or excessive ventilation, and the foot is not in its normal position, and the patient's malady is such that they have been told it will not be cured and does not comfort them, then you should make points on the surface of the foot with a pointed cautery, and three times over the foot of the hip bones, using the patient's weight to support the body.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	When the space is the one that follows after the largest cauterization of the said part, and the cauterization is after the length of the body in the direction of the foot.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not understand your friend's concern about the cauterization method.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is added is equal to the amount of the specified part of the intestine, and there is no adjustment; and if the thigh is on the feet of the patient; and if not, then the hand should be placed, which has already extended its fingers, and lift the patient's chest.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And is this the form of the cauterization?
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And is it possible for you to do this cauterization with a cutlass, when you have the necessary subtlety and prudence in the art?
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to process too much in the cauterization, and add the specified part of the entire intestine, which is added throughout the body and passes through the feet, where the thigh is subtle; and you know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of the wound of the patient with cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an inflammation or abscess appears on the skin and one wishes to know if that abscess is in the skin or in the layer of clothing, if it is in the skin, the disease becomes serious and causes pain at its point of origin.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the layer of clothing, then the pain is sharp and often wears out the doctor's patience with the cure of the patient.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, this abscess should be turned over on the shoulder; and then mark the location of the abscess that was infiltrated; and then use the cauterization that is closest to the form that was shown in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it with that and cauterize within if the entire chain is burned, within if it reaches the hip, within if it causes infection.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And cure that by treating the other abscesses within if it is cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	But it is not necessary to use this form of cauterization except for the one that was studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in many of those cases where maladies are known; but this one has experimented with some watched being ardent about this operation, but rather it is necessary for us to do this, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	De cauterizacio de plauresi" translates to "Of cauterization of ulcers
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit." translates to "The old cauterization methods of aristocratic physicians for ulcers are replaced by this manual, and the one you hold from the aristocratic physician's bag is a long, thin needle that has been found, and it is the largest of the kind.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas." translates to "And submerge that in oil and heat it up, and cauterize using a cauterization tool located in that place which is between the continuity of the shoulder bone and the collarbone; and two small cauterizations are made at the end where the beard is left, and two cauterizations are made on either side of the decline that is the fifth costa, declining a few to the parts behind; and one more cauterization in the middle of the pietz location, and one over the stomach, and three cauterizations on the parts behind; and one cauterization in the location that is between the two spallas, and two cauterizations on the two latz of the pietz, and then the cauterization on the parts between those two spallas.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	When you do not want to pay for your medicine, ensure it is in the manifest of the work in progress.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	We have already told you about some of the people who use iron cauteries resembling razors and ignite them, and place them in that location between the ribs, so that they may reach the opposite hip and be expelled without causing pain, as has been said in the apostle's ribs.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this cauterization, there is no fear of the iron, for it does not cause as much harm as has happened in the location of the fistula where it was not treated and could not be cured.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 3.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the table.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the wound of the table, it is said that the cure is made in the division and not to confirm your cure, you should cauterize on it in three or four lines according to the length of the table according to the figure of the cauteries of the apostle, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	When a point is made between any cautery and the largest part of a tooth or a few teeth, and the hand of the cauterist is the hand that has been mentioned in the cauterization of the patient's gum graft.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And you do not understand the matter, but I understand the cauterist; and the thigh should be elevated over the affected part.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And if another hand is needed to cauterize, it is because you do not know the cauterist, which has caused them to say in the capital of muscle dislocation, and they have removed the tendon that is in the end of the table that is used for the left thigh.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And if your elevation is according to the length of the body, so that points are made according to the latitude of the coast.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then enter the two tendons, if possible, in that entrance where those pass through the tendon of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cauterist; and it is four points made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, make three points with the cauterist.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	When you apply the cautery point that is located on the thigh, it is most comfortable when it is positioned after several minutes of massaging the area. This is preferable to the previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On cauterization of gout.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not done on gout but on other parts properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat gout with the tools of the trade, which have been divided and do not confuse your treatment, you find that four cauterizations are made in the circuit of the abdomen, one on the stomach, another on the small intestine, another on the mesentery, and two on the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right chest, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cauterization is proportionate to the spiciness of the cod.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And return the cauterization carefully after it has been massaged for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the waste of treatment at once after the cauterization is made, because it is added to the wounds and it is quickly applied to help healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cauterization is such that it is cauterized on the belly, following the form of that which was previously shown, and that is the one in which the two are olive-shaped, following its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	The text you provided is not in a recognizable language or format for translation.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Translation: "Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with stinging urine, cover them with cauteries on the back of the foot in cold water, as between the ear and the anus, and raise your hand above the cauteries and do not twist them; and also raise your hand, and do not return to that position, for the stinging urine will settle.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cauteries are made in this way: Place two cauteries on the thighs, and on each thigh, make a point at the end of the cauterization cutter.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cauteries should be made according to the length of the thigh: and on one side, remove the flesh and the other, leave it in its place; and on each thigh, place two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And the ulcer should be treated for a long time, so that some urine may come out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And treat those causes as they have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitulum XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Chapter on the cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When pain arises from the belly due to humidity and cold, it is the digestive and retentive power that becomes weak, which is located in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with manieyras of curing and not conferring, and sometimes the thigh suffers cauterization of the digestive power exhibiting, they are cauterized with a large cauterization over the stomach according to what was done before in the cauterization of the stomach, on the circle and four cauterizations in the circuit of the subtle embellishment, on the clavilh subtle; and on the alcatin above alozis gran, or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humidity is excessive and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the pentenilh and over the intestines, and quite adjusting two cauterizations on the stomach and part of the thighs, four are sufficient for curing of which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of ancient embolisms' cauterization.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When old embalmed matter or a thick humorous exudation or corrupt moisture is found in the body, and is treated as if it were gout, it is called gout by physicians. Then, three points are made on the pus of the spine of both testicles and three points are made on the abdomen on either side of the navel for relief.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face is frequently flushed, then make a large cauterization on the stomach; also make a cauterization on the navel, and another on the clavicle, and burn it for some time, and cure it within that time if it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitulum .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	For the cauterization of the thigh, take the abscess of it.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cauterize the thigh, do you put on the cautery that is assembled as a ring.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Place that ignited cautery in the abscess of the thigh, and then put the second point in the opening of the vein that leads to the sinus of the which is sane.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When one has gout, if it is severe, then burn (cauterize) each of the joints that have reconnected, and properly care for those as needed to heal the joints within the time it becomes healthy.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you use a large cauterization on the skin, it will not heal well.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitulum xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of gouty joints that are found in nature, they are divided into parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in that place, and the patient is frightened for that reason, it can be healed by cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when an accidental gouty joint is found, and it is old, the skin is corrupted and the humidity is corrupted, and therefore it is fitting that a doctor should be called to treat that, and properly know the quantity of the depth of the said joint in front.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	One knows the cauterization that seems like a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And place that cauterization ignited in that joint, and according to the quantity in which it is inserted into the joint.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	When you need to apply the cautery to those corrosive bodies that are burned on one side or two or three, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And keep in mind the burn of the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the bladder or the intestine, keep an eye on all those places; and do not open it until you are sure that it is not penetrating the flesh.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And cure the place after it has been made healthy.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the place is sealed and all materials are removed, and there is no sign of inflammation for a long time, you will know that it has been completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the materials are not of the same as the old ones, you will know that they penetrate or in the prey of them corrode, or open it for those causes that you will remember in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the application of cautery to the nails.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the nails there is pain from cold or from large ventilation, and if the thigh of the patient is inflamed, you should know that cautery is applied to that over the nails as it is applied to each nail as the rememoration of the clavicle that precedes.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	When the second point is carefully cauterized, so that three lines of cauterization can be made, and more pain will be avoided in the future.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterization of the vagina.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the vagina becomes thin and soft due to cold and moisture, and the bladder does not retain urine, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area at the tip of the vagina, over the vesical opening, using the teeth of a razor, and also at the side of the vagina.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cauterization is according to the number of notches on the thorn; and it is cauterized at that point or at both points if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cauterization is made according to the process used.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterization of the clitoris.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and moisture reach the clitoris, and pregnancy is forbidden, and the menstrual cycles are corrupted, and conception is delayed, and pain is felt in the area of the clitoris, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with three cauterizations around the umbilicus, as has been said in the cauterization of the vagina; and it is cauterized over the tip of the clitoris or at both points, and the cauterization is a thorn.
Capitol .xl.	The first source sentence is "Capitol .xl." which trans
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's a line-
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When cold humors infiltrate the joint of the ankle, and pain occurs due to the swelling of the surrounding tissue, and it is necessary to prolong the thigh over the other when compared to it.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	When the location of the dislocation is atrophied in that way, it should be treated with ice and compression.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cover the area with a cauterizing agent on the side of the ankle where the cauterization will be performed, because you have to avoid touching the circumference of the part that is rolling up, and so that the part falls into the circle's location.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cauterization of which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cauterization is not at your disposal, you can cauterize that with three cauterizing agents made of olive oil.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cauterization should be made according to the amount of the intestine's spasm; and then care for that when it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Capital, Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is felt in the side of the ankle, and it is caused by the cold and dryness of the humor, the thigh should be treated as follows: that which has been said and not confirmed, and that is ancient, you cover the thigh with large amounts of humors gross or sweets made from pills or artificial pills or semblants; and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	When the cautery is used, there are two main types: one for medical purposes and one for fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two scientific cautery tools, one of which is used to cauterize the area over the ankle of the patient, following this triangular form; and it should be done with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cauterization is determined by the size of the object, whether it is a small or large cauterization.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes, the cautery is placed over the middle of the neck for four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, cauterize at the circle that is required for the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and it should be a continuous and burning circle that includes the entire spine.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the cautery tool used when pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend beyond the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it extends beyond the thigh, then cauterize that at two points on the thigh above the location where the wound is located; and a cauterization on the cavity for four days about the same part as before.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If the cautery is a scalpel, and the depth of the cautery depends on the amount of the spicule of the codon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the joint pain extends to the location where the feet are, and the doctor advises to cauterize there, then cauterize it with three points or four or more if directed by the doctor.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the joint pain extends to the donor of the thigh, then cauterize it there with a scalpel cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	E keep in mind that during cauterization, do not use the cautery as a burning nerve or large artery, and if so, you may cause harm to the patient or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	E and you have already seen one and another of those that were cauterized over the cavity and ended in the cauterization, and the fire was inflamed inside when the tumor achieved the foot, and the fire melted and corrupted the whole foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And if an acid solution of the stomach is applied, and then death follows.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts and each is cauterized according to this method, it will relieve the pain.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	When the cauterant is applied in the cauterization of ankle cauterization, this is the mantra: make it resemble a circle of iron where the circuit is the largest part of a palm; and it should be the size of a large bone or a small part of a thumb.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And cut that circle into another part; and the space between them is the quantity of the nail of the thumb; and those circles are divided into two parts; and the length of those lines is a nail or two nails, and make those margins of the iron decently displayed in the circles; and this is the form of it.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be lit in the fire when it is wrapped around and starts to sparkle, and it should be placed over the ankle, the thigh covered with a cloth.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that part with three cauterizations in a line.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And you should dress that part with three plasters; and you should clean the border of the wound with water for several days; and you should cure that part when it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Here comes the translation of the first source sentence:
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	When the points are made on the affected part, it causes pain and agony.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	It is customary for doctors to use cauterization, which involves making two circles around the hole that has been perforated in the skin, where the tip of the needle or rod is located. The length of the wound should be about two inches or as needed.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	If the space between them is not enough to accommodate the quantity of the growth; and they are removed further and laterally, and they should be placed side by side in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place your hand over the opening of the anus, and cover it with your thumb; and prepare to catch the tail and fold it between two circles, and the quality of that should be as small as possible, and take about an hour for the pain to subside, and suffer the anus to micturate and defecate — when the micturation ceases — entro que cesse la micturacion.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand and take the instrument, and remove the tail of the water from the entire anus, leaving only the water inside.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	When the patient has lain down for three hours and rests on that border where the black vesicle of the inflammation remains, then apply this remedy for three days, and let it run over the affected area; this is beneficial.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And cure that part as soon as it becomes healthy.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make the patient lie down on their side and place an ice pack on the affected area.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the mania of cold water, and I have already written about this in the book on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and caustic that is not extinguished in one part, and then strip it and let it run over a new wave of the quality of which the part is left perforated by a small puncture, according to the amount that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And let the end of the other wave pass over the same wave, and place the alkali and caustic water over the live water, pouring the water that comes from two vessels into it, and understand that these are for good compression, and apply the cold water to the hot water in the part that is left in the wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust the entire amount of that juice, and throw it on another part of the body, and add other alkaline substances, which are made from operations in medicine and cauterization of other parts of the body, which operation is done by fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines are made from those that are cauterized wide, such as honey and salt, which are mixed together to make a paste.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Guadalupe tells of an ancient operation and cure, in which the pain of ankle and sciatica was cured, and many people were made healthy by a vegetable called "holy basil," which was known to penetrate that part.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And if it is near certain herbs, and if not green, then a recent fig is taken; and if it is a little bit of gray, and is placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and is seen.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be applied for three hours or according to the amount that the patient can tolerate.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	You should know that not all doctors use cauterization in these medicines unless they have the means to remove the heart.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	When Escorrides said that when the intestine is tightened by a sheep's gut, it is cauterized at its own; and the cauterization should be done on the second hand as follows: it should be held with a string and soaked in old oil, and placed between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And if you hold the dried and inflamed sheep's gut at that point where pain is felt, and place it on the string and loosen the entrance that is compressed.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And keep doing this until the pain of the biting subsides within the ankle and returns to its previous state.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this cauterization is called the cauterization of sheep.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization for pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is in one leg due to several causes such as gout, thorn, or excessive evacuation, and for other causes similar to those, by the infusion of wet and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	If cauterization is not done in this specific case, which is caused by the effusion of watery humors, it should not be performed.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Indeed, the evacuation of the foot should be done with pills fitted to its shape and appearance, which are points over the two in the line where the pain is located, according to the latitude of the foot, because it may need a cauterization or less, according to the tolerance of the foot and the virtue of the patient.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And if there is a point for cauterization, then use cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four points, or with one point on the median clavicle according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol, Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Regarding cauterization at the beginning of gilt-freezing.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Watches are seen on the feet of these children; and since the beginning of the foot in the children, it is that they affect their structure in the ankle and elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And wasting occurs on the lower back of the two and the nails of the foot that begin to overtop the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	When you see that and wish to stop it, then make points on this cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over the entire part of the spine engagement.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, make points on the circuit of the spine with the cautery of two or three points.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be in between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then cure the place that is healthy as it has been said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May you keep in mind that the cautery should not be administered in yellowish tissue that is a result of nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cautery for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, how is gout treated by cold humors with the hand of cure and not to increase the pain, then make points with the cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	This is the translation of the first line: "And it is that you cauterize that nearby evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with the cauterization tool.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	This line seems to be asking if the cauterization tool used is olive oil. The translation would be: "And is this the form of the cauterization tool?" or "And is this the
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery." This line is advising the user to use a sharp instrument to make incisions or marks on the skin of the foot for medical purposes.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain spreads to the neighboring joints or other joints, and it worsens, then you should cauterize that over each joint with three or four turns of this cauterization tool made of olive oil." This line is advising the user to apply multiple turns of the cauterization tool to different joints in order to alleviate pain and improve the condition.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If the necessary cauterizations are found to be similar, then you should cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand, only slightly around the specific area." This line is advising the user to apply gentle pressure when cauterizing and not to force the tool too hard in order to avoid causing further harm.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pain worsens in the knee and elbow, then you should apply the cauterization tool that was previously mentioned." This line is advising the user to use the same cauterization tool that was previously recommended for the affected joint.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If the pain is only in the most recent times, and it is called sugar, then you should make points on the circuit of the forefingers as they rotate, making points on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If the pain remains in the following parts, then make points on the circuit of the belly buttons on each navel and on the clitoris of the female.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain persists in these joints of the thighs or muscles, then cauterize the points of all parts of the assistants.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not remove the patient's good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is well regulated and in good condition, this cauterization will be beneficial, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization of wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When the wound is in the ankles and the intestines are coming out of the hernia, and then do as follows: you must command the patient to eat less on that day and use gentle causes for it because the bowel will be pulled from the abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And follow the patient's advice on the other side of the abdomen and command him to hold the abdomen when it is flat or appears that the hernia or the intestine is coming out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return that to the abdomen and press on the bones of the pelvic girdle, and call for help if the pain seems to resemble the pain of a circle in the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	When there is a cold humor that has entered the body, causing joint pain, especially in the feet, it is customarily referred to as gout by medical prof
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And if you pause the cautery on that part of the skin, and then enter with your hand to touch the pentenilh within the meatus of the urethra; and repeat this approach if you have not succeeded in the first attempt within the urethra.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the state of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, as you do not burn that intestine because it has not come out over the thigh or for some other great misfortune.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you know that when you touch the cautery, do not ignore the bones, and your operation will not be successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	When the cauterization of children is done with subtlety according to their greatness and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And care for the site of the cauterization for three days, so that the wound of the fire may become less inflamed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it with those who are close to you, so that it becomes healthy again.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	When the wound is covered over on the right side for ten days, after sealing the site and the plague.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And pay attention to the nutrition of him according to the length of time for the cure of him, and that the intestine does not come out of the belly, and that the hernia does not come out due to the efforts of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when you want to take away for ten days, administer gentle ointments and hold it for others for ten days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And this diet and fasting and drinking, and vigorous exercise, when you use this entire regimen of medicine, will make you healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you direct the cure of the ruptures in other parts of the belly, and as at the beginning, and you want that they do not come out, cauterize the rupture of that which is done according to the quantity of it, and be careful that it is exhumed from the abdomen like the last part of it; and take care of that which has been said, and do not adjust.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	When the first cut has been made, it is recommended to cauterize it with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it helps to stop the bleeding.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And another line is placed along the latitude in the latitude, and a third line at the bottom; and then remove your hand from it, but use a clavichord cauterization instead of the first one, which was placed further away and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in any of the limbs due to strain or percussion and persists for a long time without relieving the symptoms of the doctor, it is necessary to cauterize with a point cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cauterization of each part according to its magnitude and smallness, as well as its veins and development, and the location of the twist and pain in the member.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cauterization, it is good; and if not, you should repeat the cauterization over it. Four out of five punctures are those that are close to the member from which you want to remove them, because you can reach them with the point cautery when that member is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a language that
De cauterizacio de lepra.	De cauterizacio de lepra" translates to "Of cauterization in leprosy
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia" translates to "The wounds of some leprosy patients are cauterized with great success, and the specialty of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of flax and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	When you want to cauterize that part, consider if leprosy is present and if it has been cured as said in the division and not done, nor this, and fears about the thigh that corruption comprehends the entire body of him and the whole complexion of him, then cauterize that over the head with a pointed cautery: one on the top of the head, and one further down from there, and turn the face to the end of the hair; and hold it firmly, over the nape or servant.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, if the cauterization is made a little within the bone before it enters the joints, and the strings are displaced, because the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; then cauterize on the next part as requested.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already expanded over the thigh and manifestly appears, then you should know that the cauterization is done on those as said in the head: and cauterize on the extremity of the nose, and on two of the upper eyelids, and on two of the collarbones, and on two of the shoulders, and on the two shoulder blades, and on the great spine near the neck, and on the neck, and on each ankle, and on one of each ankle, and on each wrist, and on one of each wrist, and on each knuckle, and on one of each knuckle, and on each muscle, and on both sides of the thigh; and cauterize that on all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each toe of the feet, and on the flesh of the thighs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	When guarding the nerves that are over the thigh that does not burn, it is necessary to do so.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery over the bones of the pelvis and over the mouth of the stomach, and over the anus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the fewer times you cauterize, the less effective and less beneficial it is; and you know that the thigh does not have pain in the cauterization, just as they have them, so that the body of the patient has already become stupefied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints, following which species of tools precede them.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And properly care for the cauterization with flour of errors, honey, and the other cure, when it is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capital 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cauterization for stupefaction.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stupefied or falls asleep and is treated with medicines, ointments, and plasters, and does not become healthy, then you should cauterize that stupefied member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When the cold humors infiltrate the joints of the body, a few points are made on the surface of the foot using a pointed cautery.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if the affected part becomes healthy, then it is cured.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes, the affected part is cauterized with a stupefying substance that helps to relieve pain in the limbs and spine, and stimulates the nerves that supply that member, making the stupefying substance more effective.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	This should not be done unless one has knowledge of the anatomy of the limbs and the movement of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of cauterization of ulcers that are gangrenous.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the ulcer is old and does not respond to the treatment of the affected part of medicine, then you should cauterize over that point using a pointed cautery after a certain amount of time has passed, according to the quantity of the joint's flesh that becomes white and changes color, and the color of the ulcer also changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And if the affected part is treated with flour and lentils of rose oil and arngos leaves, and saffron or yellow saffron, each part is a portion and all are mixed, and then it is wrapped in a cloth and placed over the area until it becomes healthy.
Capitol .l.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language
De cauterizacio de cranc.	De cauterizacio de cranc" translates to "Of cauterization of gout
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut" translates to "When cancer begins and you want that part of the body, then cauterize that point with a pointed cautery in the circle of the skin where it is rolled.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that the point that is cauterized on the skin is in the middle of the cauterization; I have not seen this before, for fear that it may be ulcerated, and I have already seen some wounds.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is said that the point that is cauterized in the circumference of the skin is like the one we have described, or like the one that is made to be cauterized.
Capitol .li.	Capitol.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cauterization of adulteration.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an adulteration is slow in maturation, and that is due to superfluity or the state of the thighs, which is old and thin, or for time, and you want to accelerate the maturation of adulteration; then cauterize on the circumference of that point that is smaller than the one that is made to be cauterized, and apply it so that it does not become too hard in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make the point of the cauterization, then you should know the cauterization that this is the form of: and stop it at the point of the adulteration when it penetrates the codena.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the cautery is applied in that location where it was previously placed, for the reason that the arm of the bracelet is loosened; and accordingly, care should be taken to enter that area which is becoming healthy.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of cauterization of gout.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Gout is a wandering corruption in the member, which consumes that part as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you sometimes see that gout in the location where it was previously cauterized with fire, then you should use fewer cauterization clavuses, and larger ones as appropriate in the location where the gout is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And cauterize that from all sides entering until the entire corruption is eradicated and no cause remains of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And apply that for three days, and then place your hand over the cauterized locations once a day until all the wounds are completely eradicated and the entire corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And take care of that with an ointment made from burnt herbs.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If after three days the skin begins to heal in that location where there is no corruption, then so be it; otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization over the parts that are still corrupting.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	When some doctors treat certain patients with sharp knives in place of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization is more effective for healing.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure of the acute medicine division, and then take that when it has occurred.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cauterization of claws and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Scars are seen in the parts where the large, rough claw of the patient's foot has bitten, and it causes pain; then cauterization is performed on two sides, either with hot iron or with a cold snout.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cauterization with hot iron is similar to a burn, which is made by the amount of iron that contains the claw of each part, and it is done with fine cuts.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And stop the heat on the claw, and then turn your hand over to the cauterization in the circuit of the claw while it comes to the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	The text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's a line-by-line translation of the
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And if it is necessary to apply a plaster to the wound, then apply the plaster over it for a day, so that the wound will be cured of its wounds.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And properly care for the area that is inflamed due to the presence of dead tissue.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If it does not convert, and visible signs of inflammation appear on the surface of the body, primarily in the chest and feet, you must administer first aid using hot cauteries, and take a piece of iron or copper wire, and place it over the hole; and then apply a little cold water to the wound, and hold your hand over it, and turn the compress of your hand around the claw, and press the end of the wire against the end of the claw, and pull the wire out of the claw's end through the hole of the claw; and wait for a while until the end of the wire is bitten by the inflamed tissue for an hour, and then remove it, and make sure the claw is in its original position.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if you do not find it, and the other part is also affected, then cover all those that are in the body with it.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And properly care for those pus that the wounds of the claws have been eliminated as much as possible from the inflamed tissue.
Capitol .liiii.	The first line of the text is "Capitol .liiii." which
De cauterizacio de tremor.	De cauterizacio de tremor" translates to "Of cauterization for tremors
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatro cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar." translates to "When tremors are caused by cold humors in the nerves or due to fever of the cause being cold, or for some other reason, it is necessary to cauterize that part with four cauterizations or one over the spine of each vertebra, between each vertebra and a cauterization; and to cauterize on the chest and stomach of the patient, and on the olive.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the shaking of the patient ceases and the health of the affected member improves, it is considered a cure.
Capitol .lv.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but "Capitol .lv
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	A burn from an acupuncture procedure can occur on the chest.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the chest, and the pustules are formed by materials that are grossly corrupted, then as it begins to appear, that it should be cauterized over all of the opening of the canula, which is subtle at the end, the extremity of which is extended to fire; or from long estrus; or from slow cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the veins are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and it is not surprising, and the excess is broken into those, and they become healthy.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is believed that this is a proper evacuation by flebutomy.
Capitol lvi.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but "Capitol lvi
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	A burn from a cut that occurs in the liver due to an incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops that are seen flowing from the arrowhead that is pierced by the plague, or from the incision of the apostemas or cauterization of the member, and then seeming, and it is difficult to remain there.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When you have to deal with gout, you should cut off the part of the thigh that is closest to the anus, and place something over that part to prevent it from being touched again until the flow of the sac has stopped and no more comes out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place a few greenish-olive cautery sticks in the fire and light them, and blow on those until they are hot enough.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And take a small or large part of that location and place it over the vein firmly, so that the previously mentioned artery is not affected and remains in its place, and then cauterize it so that it is cut off and stays in its place.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the sac is expelled from the anus of the artery while you are still cutting the part and removing the cauterization, then take another sharp cauterization stick from the ones that are prepared in the fire, and continue doing this until the sac is secured.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And remember not to burn the nerves that are here, and it will come back over the thigh another time with malice.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	1. You should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it in those restraints, and especially when the artery is large, not even with one of four methods: with cauterization as mentioned earlier, or extraction if it is not extracted, four when it is extracted, the extremities of the veins are burned and the current is restricted, or that it is narrowed by a ligature or a constricting device, or that they are placed over the medicines of those which restrict the current; and they are strong like a pulley or a constraint.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	When one administers a proper diet to the body and restricts certain foods that cause inflammation or constipation, such as spicy or fried foods, it is unlikely that they will feel comfortable without any relief.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	When there is no doctor or medicine available, one should manually close the wound of that vein as they have been told, and understand the great pressure inside that part of the plague that has been separated from the intestine, and over the artery, it is not damaged; and over the artery, it is squeezed with wet feces when that part is crowded and engorged; and less should be done if it requires cauterization or medical treatment.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second part begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and puncture, and ventouse, and of plague and its kinds.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are phrases from Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first book of all the diseases that cauterization is convenient and effective, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments used in those cases, and I have ordered the chapters of the subcutaneous fat around the head.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And your procedure in this chapter for that purpose, so that the seeker of this knowledge may be satisfied with it, and you do what is asked of you.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	When you begin this work, son, I advise you to be careful, as in this first capital of cauterization, there is great fear.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	For this reason, it is necessary to take great care, as in the operation that is being performed here, several catgut strips are used, which help evacuate the blood that should be present in the vein or make an incision over the aposteme or excise for excretion or purification of the plague or extraction of stones or incision of peyra and their appearance.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	When all of these symptoms are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst case, death, then it is time to seek medical attention.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	You advise me that I should not fall into the disease of gout in this situation, as some women's hands have been known to be affected by such ailments.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	When you go to the patient's bedside and see that they are in great pain and suffering from their illness, and because of the severity of the illness and its long duration, and the illness is causing the patient to suffer, then the illness is the cause of their death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from those you know what to expect and say, hoping for that cure, and the patient's illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And you do not suppose that you agree with the one who sees you of the quality of this manly; and your caution is greater than expected and your greed; and you do not presume any cause over it except certain knowledge that you must inform us of, and which will be passed on in a commendable way.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the care of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication of the one who is converted to health, wherein you assist them over acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, children, God is in you the divine understanding and does not leave you without direction and protection, because this is in its own hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	When you order this chapter to be distinguished from the following chapters that precede it in the chapter of cauterizations, concerning the care of the foot within the feet, so that you may know what you asked for and for which there is a need.
Capitol primier.	1st Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	The treatment of urine, which is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this malady is seen in the children and that you must give them their childhood and when the nurse stretches the child's head, its life is at stake.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some are seen because of a lack of care that is not cleaned.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this malady except in children; and all those that I see are in danger of death, and for this reason I have seen some good work done in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that a child's head was full of urine, and its head was very magnificent until it could no longer be over the greatness of the child's head, and less when the moisture became better until it could no longer be over the fire of death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	When this moisture or is added between the vertebra and the bone, or is added further down on the bones.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	In the first line of the source sentence, it seems that the text is discussing an operation where humidity is present between the vertebrae and the bone, and the post is placed in the middle of the head. The author suggests covering the area with a cloth to prevent water from entering. The second line mentions a fissure in the latitud, which is likely referring to a crack or split in the bone. The length of the fissure is said to be twice the size of the humidity that enters it. The third line describes this as the shape of the spatum.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If humidity increases and the aposteme becomes greater, you will find two fissures in this manner according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is below the skull, then you see the commissures of the bare scalp become wet and sweaty when you touch that area with your hand, which is a sign that the poultice made with the tievyah plant is not suitable for the entire body.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cover the three fissures in the back of the head with this hand.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And apply the extracted ointment throughout the humidity; and firmly close the fissures with draps and plumassols; and cover it over the eye and let the oil penetrate into the skin for five days, and gently caress the throat and engage the tongue, and firmly close the cap equal to the other member that is comfortable and healthy.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another incision of the same size as the wound and collection of sweat, for some veins are less in the occipital region, or in the part below, or on the right or left; and then pay attention to the incision where the wound and collection of sweat appear, and follow what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	You should observe that the artery does not infringe and diverts blood vessels from the leg to the body for that flow of blood to be eliminated by evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	1. "Capitol" is not a standard medical term,
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	2. "Inscisio" means "incision", "arterias" means "arteries", "aprop" means "attached", "aurelhas" means "ears", and "hilasseysse" is not a standard medical term. It might be a misspelling or a
Capitol segon.	3. "Capitol segon" is not a standard medical
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	4. "Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs or al pietz" means "When you end the catharsis or rhumatism on the knees or the chest". "E es antiquitat aquo" means "And it is antiquated in this", "e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas" means "and does not confirm in this the cure of the physicians", "lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias" means "you should apply the same cure in this incision of those
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	5. "E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap" means "And cover when you want to incise those that the thigh wants to cap", "aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias" means "appropriately roughen the location as deep as the arteries appear", "e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap" means "and strengthen the neck of the thigh with the doctor's hand", "e aprop considera on polsa la vena" means "and consider where to cut the vein", "e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz" means "and the locations of each over the locations that the ears are depressed", "e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes" means "and they should be hidden only in men".
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And place your hand over the artery at the point where it is, and place an incision in each of the parts that are in pain, and let it be through the bone of each part, and it will be for the latitude of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, enter the spatula into the artery and turn it to the parts that are in pain.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if the length of the incision is twice as much as the depth that any vein is cut, when a vein is cut and it is seen coming out with pulsation, the which collapses suddenly for the collapse of the frequency.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear in the pulse, it is necessary that you measure the length of the abdomen and place your hand on the point where it is, and enter through the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which is necessary to cut the vein in the amount of one-tenth, and less than half of the amount that can be, and then it is according to the amount that appears on the strength of the thigh and the repletion of the artery of the vein.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And if you consider the phlegm, and then if you remain on the bone any cause of pain, it is necessary that you incise accordingly so that it does not cause strangulation of the cautery.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When you press on the swollen part with your thumb, and care for it as if it were inside, it will become healthier.
Capitol .iii.	Capitulum III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	When removing the arteries that are in the templates.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old wound or catarrh occurs in the humors that are in the templates, and it is similar to the old ones, and it is treated with the hands of curacious medicine, but it does not relieve, we have come to this problem of extractions of arteries in the templates or cauterization of those parts as they have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the hand of the operation and extraction of those is what the template race does to the ones that are in the templates; and understand the artery that appears in the template as it is shown by the two hands, and it is hidden only in a few people due to the vehemence of feces.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, the part of the template is strengthened by some fabric; and place the feces in the location where there is a dry or wet cloth or the tailor's shop that appears to you as the artery clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And take the salve of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And when you reach the waist, you will find that it is easier to enter through the arch; and you will get out of it and take out that which was inside the coden and discover that which was in the tunics, which were left outside of it, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, you will wrap that around the end of the onyx and insert one part after another according to the number of those that are elongated at the ends of it and are contracted, and if it does not leak fluid, then it will not be able to lift the fluid from all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And you will empty the fluid of three units.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the artery is large, you will cover that with two layers of cloth or ropes, and do not let it get to the putrefaction due to the consolidation of the pus and prevent the leakage of fluid.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And you will remove the excess that is between two layers; and do it at that time or at another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you want, cauterize that with a cautery within the bone that is cauterized with a sharp instrument within which the ends of it are incised and will remain in place of that work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better work if the fever or the affliction is not in the groin; rather, cauterization is used for those causes that help to dry the moist areas, and therefore it is better in its youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	When cutting the arteries that obstruct the ancient part of the thigh, and placing them on the smooth parts of the leg, and applying pressure with your hand to make the flesh more supple, and allowing the doctor to perform surgery more easily, it is necessary.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	While you are working on another part of the artery, if you touch the sac of the artery, either tighten it with your hand or with a cautery, or compress the area around the thigh, and hold it firmly to prevent the sac from expanding.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If the cause of that is not present, stop pressing on the part where the sac is compressed, and wrap the area with a wet cloth to prevent freezing, and hold it firmly until the acuity returns, and be careful to hold it steady.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	That is why when cutting the vein, it is necessary to cauterize with a cautery that has two points, because you have seen the two locations where the pain is, and stopped pressing, not gently, but firmly, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two parts, so that it is elongated from the extremities of the leg, which are not consolidated by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the method of cauterization:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	When the sharpness of the two heels is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	When however there is only sharp pain that two cots are better, then if the pain is sharp and comes quickly after each step, and does not pass through the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	When there is any swelling in those places, the heat of the fire is held in those and the flesh is gradually peeled off.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better in its entirety and puts it aside.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	When the space between two thighs is of a certain size, it is considered appropriate.
Capitol quart.	When the space between two thighs is of a certain size,
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	of the cure of the chest for acute and acidic husks.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the husks are acidic and the chest is affected by those veins that are over the root of the head, and do not respond to any cause of medicinal cure, and sometimes the face of the thigh becomes elongated and seems like it is walking on the front legs of ants, and the husks become dry, as if the points of their nails were sharp, the ancient herbs in this operation are scarce, and the cure for this operation is far from being close.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the thigh to bend the nails that are on the front, and insert three incisions into the front, separated by the distance of the front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two-thirds, then the first fissure should be distant from the nasal location of the front by two thirds of the movement of the fingers that are on the lacrimal, and the third part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	When guarding the incision of the arteries that are in two parts, and extend your hand for the continuation of biting the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If the space of any incision is three times its width.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have a sponge-like layer or sheets that absorb moisture for those that dry the wound.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then place the sponge between the two sharp ends, which is the form of the incision.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What of the part where the templates enter the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Apply to the entire chain that is between two incisions and the bone that is over the bone, and then the wound will move into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then strain the sponge and enter it into another incision with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp side of the scalpel by the flesh annexed to the chain, and the other end of the leon's tooth on the bone, and press that which comes through the fissure, and cut off all those that descend from the head to the toes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	When the incision is continued on this side, and it appears to come out of the narrow opening into the other opening.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And suppose that the amount of blood is increased, then remove the locations of the cedent's toes.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And pause in every narrow opening of the thigh bone, and pause on those parts that are full of hair, oil, and sweat, and see that it does not cause gangrene.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the catheter and administer a large infusion of water or saline, and apply this to the affected area, which is reddish-orange in color and other areas where the plagues are cured.
Capitol .v.	Capital.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of gangrene by catheter and the descendants of the parts of the fingers.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the catheter is removed from the vein and continued, and sometimes the fingers are reduced in size, and their appearance becomes blurred, and the ulcers on the eyelids and the edges of the nails are inflamed and excoriated, and in the pre-onset of the head there is acute pain and subsequent extenuation, you should know that these accidents are due to the materials and catheters not entering through the veins of the fingers.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for this is to command the patient to sit down and place a finger in the hole of the forehead, making a small incision in the middle of the forehead, starting from the left temple to the right temple; then enter the bone within the knuckles of the fingers, which are the ones that need to be shaved; when the bone is exposed,
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	When the entire surface of the wound is dry and clean, and if it is possible to replace the flaps or edges between the fissure of the groin or the flaps themselves, do so.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then, mix finely with powdered herbs in wine and apply it to the affected area to prevent the formation of pustules.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	When you see that the pustule has diminished, take care to cover the wound with powdered herbs as soon as it begins to enter the flesh of the nail, and apply a remedy that dries the skin, as if you were making dough from flour and collinseed oil in equal parts, and mixing them, and applying the plaster to these diseases of the native skin.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the remedy for the swelling that occurs in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of swelling in the ears is one of four species, which can be either a mineral stone or something that resembles a stone, like iron and steel, or it can be from a plant, like chamomile or fennel, or it can be caused by fluid, like water and vinegar, or it can be the semblance of some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	When joint pain is present in the knee or another cause resembles those causes that do not adjust or believe in the knee, and stops the knee to the sun, and if the pain appears, distillation is made in a certain cause of olive oil or sesame, and applies the extraction of the same, and makes it condise, and presses the nails for the event of the withdrawal.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And some pause in the circuit of the ring around certain thighs of cloth or wool, and extend the ring to the parts thereof, as many turns as can be remembered for these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gotten, then administer an extraction from the part with the instrument called the epi-cicerary, which is of this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten, then so be it; and otherwise, you administer the extraction of this part with a subtle and few duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not forgotten for this, then you make a cannula of ram and enter the extremity of the cannula into the opening of the aureola and close it at the end of the cannula with wax and olive oil so that it is not cut until the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And if you extract from the upper part of the thigh, then too many turns are required as much as can be remembered for this cause.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If not forgotten in this manner, then you press with your thumb or with the back of your hand on the part where the nails are pressing on the skin a certain quantity, and place that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelops it gently around the cotton.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	When entering that part of the ear that is easiest to reach, and removing any moisture from it.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if you do not forget all the causes that have been mentioned, then make points on that part where the tendon or muscle is most tender.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the hand of that part is what you must first cauterize at the beginning, to cut off the vein of the sephalic sinus and then extract the second part of the intestine, and then make a small fissure in the lower part of the ear, and place the thread in the location where it is most comfortable.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fissure of the lunar figure goes into the foot, and the foot is atrophied, remove that which can be done with appropriate instruments; and cut the fissure at the speed that is appropriate, and treat that part inside the foot that is becoming healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	E if the cause of the pain in the ear is one of the greasy ones that have been cooked and inflamed, then administer the treatment and remove it; but if you do not follow your advice and instructions, then you must take subtle substance according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	When treating an abscess on that part of the body that is located in the groin, apply warm compresses and keep the area clean.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	Do not apply cold compresses when you think that the area has already been hydrated by the steam from the groin, and stop moving the area as much as possible, and carefully extract any remaining tissue or subcutaneous fat, or if necessary, use a scalpel to make an incision.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the anus that is inserted into the groin, use the medication as directed by the doctor and complete the anus with a cloth old enough to fit, and place a warm compress on the anus where the abscess is located, and if for any reason it is forgotten, do not worry; otherwise, take several large cotton balls and heat them in the oven, and then place one of them in the patient's anus and press it against another cotton ball that is covering the area to relieve the pain.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop applying the compress as soon as all of the abscess is visible.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	When the wound is cleaned with paper or gauze, and you place one end of the thread in the hole and stretch the other end as much as possible until it is tightly closed, then it is ready for use.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if you make and cut as many slits as possible within the wound, and then stretch the cannula over the entire wound so that it is outside of the extra-urinary bladder, then it is ready for use.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a foreign body that has entered the wound, if it is small, it can be removed with great care and skill, as described in the division; but if it is large, the cause of its appearance at the time of extraction should be investigated, and the cause of the wound should be made known to all other causes that may have caused the wound.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the removal of worms that have been generated in the wound, when you treat that worm as described in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not confirm your cure, then you should closely monitor the wound under sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If here any cause of the gallstones appears, then take out that part with the hand or with one of those subtle tools, but if no such cause is found, then take a rigid catheter and pull it out from there, and this is the form of the gallbladder:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Enter the subtle end in the anus according to the amount that suffers from the gallbladder; and then push it with force, and make sure you see the edges clearly, entering if all the gallstones are small.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey my instructions, then you will leave and close the circuit of the catheter as they have said; you will administer distillations which have already been sprouted in the treatment of gallstones, and find it in the distillation tract.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And is your discharge from that which you have emptied in the anus with this instrument of which this is the form of the gallbladder?
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or of iron, rigid, in which there is a small hole, and it will be easier to push through.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	When it comes to being in the cavity of the uterus, as necessary here, one should do so.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the uterus, and place it in the concavity of the anus, or of any herb, or of that which you want of these medicines in the canula — and that is in the anus —, and insert the ray into the uterus and expel it from there at the same time as the oil is expelled in the concavity of the anus and the patient feels the oil's heat.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And if it is wrapped around the anus, it has already been burned by a little fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And keep in mind that the cause you will distill in the anus is not too cheap, as the medicines of the anus do not suffer from this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure for anal warts.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some warts are found in the bellies of women who have not been pierced, and these have already caused problems in men, warts on the meat of the anus due to pain or nothing in that; and this wart is found in the prepuce of the anus that does not consent to the cutting, and some are found in the parts that are deformed.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	When something happens in the pre-on (pregnancy) of the patient, which they do not understand, it is in the more difficult cases of difficult care.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you have achieved the desired effect, make sure that you place the anus of the patient towards the sun and look in that direction.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see apparent swelling, open that small spatula of which this is the form of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where there is small latitude, of which one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula is of two leons (or points) so that it does not cause pain to the anus.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the swelling is due to fleshy growth in the anus or in the meat of the patient, use those small spatulas and press with great force until it is completely removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the swelling is in the prepuce of the anus, use a small spatula of a leon and heat it slightly, and then insert it into the anus.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you feel swelling in the anus that the patient's thigh becomes easy to open due to gravity, try to increase the pressure of the spatula on the anus; and remember not to harm the nerves of the anus.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When you have paused in the second layer of the cloth of the second part of the Egyptian ointment; and do so for a few days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or if you take any powder and thrust it into the water and sprinkle it over the plague according to the way you use it and use it on it; and if you find that the cloth has already been soaked, then you should know that you have mistakenly taken the powder and replaced it with another powder of the same kind that you will wrap in a cloth that is red or pink, if it is the plague that is red or pink; and take care of that within a few days until it becomes healthy.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If you have an abscess, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the thigh, and use another cure from another source that restricts the flow of the abscess, which is said in the chapter of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitulum VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the cure of asthenia that ends up in the eyes.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	When the cold humors that infiltrate the body's joints are caused by a specific type of cold, some of them become dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then, if you have those sharp points or spikes, and cut them into smaller pieces, and place them over the areas that need it.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If there is pain in the flow of venomous blood, then you should use a subtle cautery on those points.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is when the points are made with sharp and dry instruments, and when they return to their original shape when returned to their original position; and when those points are burned, they become charred and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	A remedy for great pain that comes to the eyes of the feet.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Dry spots appear on the eyelids of the feet due to an unknown cause that is related to their strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called "great pain.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And there is an addition of moisture in the eyelids of the feet.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	This operation in their eye is that which you should consider as inflammation if it arises from the eyelid and is exacerbated throughout; and its cause is unknown.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then cover that wound with a dressing, and fasten it so that it is easily entered into when discharged, and suspend it so that it does not drop off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	However, if you are not familiar with the beginning of the wound, and you do not push the tip of your finger into the incision several times, it is not known in this case for any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the size is large, you adjust the suture to it; and care for that after it has healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer from that for the next part of the gout, as you restore and encase it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the inflammation is declining towards the corners of the eyelid, you should superficially cut the corner of the eyelid, and then suspend the inflammation with a stitch, another that you instruct for the incision, and press it to the whole part, and if the eyelid is elongated due to the incision, it is not known in this case for any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	When approaching the incision, wash the sharp edge with salty water; and care for the area around it that is prone to becoming infected.
Capitol .x.	Capital of the tenth.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	The cure for the eye's inner eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	The disease that arises from the layers of the inner eyelid, and more especially in children, worsens the wrinkles around them and causes their eyes to become red; and they cannot see the clarity of the sun because of this, as wrinkles appear on their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And have you ever noticed those wrinkles on their faces all the time, and especially when they sleep; and on their inner eyelids, which already have inflammation and an upcoming infection, and apparent redness in the eyes; and if you press the area with your thumbs, you will feel the infection entering those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And an operation that is often performed on the outer ear is when the ear lobe pauses the pinna at the top of the ear, and also pauses the tragus and makes it swell, and makes the circle according to the quantity of cartilage that contains the total part, and also pauses the pinna over that and presses with your thumbs on the entire perimeter because there is additional inflammation in the meatus of the ear, and the meatus is not greater than the meatus made in incision.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	When you are about to cut the umbilical cord that has come out of the womb, four things should be done: one is to clean it with a cloth, another is to tie it with a thread, and the third is to cut it with a knife. The fourth thing is to inspect it for any defects or abnormalities.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those parts that you have entered between the thighs, which are deformed and bent between the left and right sides of the body, when they are swollen.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to adjust in the fissure because the stomach may not come out of the hole and cause damage.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If you do not see your arm at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust your arm in the fissure with ease as you process the arm; and extract those parts that have been said; and submerge the hand in water and observe the swelling and pause over the location and stretch out those am polvils.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then they pull out the salt and pause that part in the cavity of the fissure because that is what remains of that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply this care that is necessary for healing.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If you happen to be in the location of the acupuncture point, apply the plaster to that area where it is painful.
Capitol .xi.	1. I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	2. seems to be incomplete or in a language other than English, Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. Could you
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	3. I apologize, but the text you provided is still incomplete or in a language that I cannot recognize. Could you please provide the complete text or clarify which language it is written in? I am designed to assist with English, Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	4. I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is still incomplete or in a language that I cannot recognize. Could you please provide the complete text or clarify which language it is written in? I am designed to assist with English, Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And thus, in the corner of the eyelid, where the lashes are adjusted, and the upper part of the eyelid is incised; and then extract the fistula and press down on the lower part of the eyelid with a small piece of cloth or bandage, and place it over the eyelid that is being cut, and it should look like a small piece of charcloth.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to note that the figure changes according to the amount of eyelid elevation, four in all, and out of those, the ones that indicate that a significant part of the eyelid should be incised according to the amount by which the eyelid is flattened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And thus, on the sputum over the two lines that you have pressed down, and begin from the upper part of the lacrimal major to the lower part of the lacrimal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural lashes, it should look like the largest of the king's.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And place the nail in one of the two angles of the girdle, and scrape it off entirely, and adjust it to the curve of the two lips of the gullet or the lynn of fine wool, and remove the sand, and make it adhere if there are any excessive parts of the nails on two sides for some reasons, if you want to do that, and if not, do not worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	When it comes to sewing the sutures of the wounds into the body within three or four days, and then caring for that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you want, remove the sutures and care for that as soon as possible, to dry and constrict the eyelid, and when the eyelid is swollen, use the plague's seal and its addition; better no sutura and so do it again.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in this case, there is concern about the thigh, and it is good operation, and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another maniery to suture, and it is that you see about the eyelid as if it were a piece of meat, and then elevate the eyelid by three incisions in this way:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	However, if it is not possible to do this, then have the incisions, and do not cut it, then take a ring in which there is thread and put it on the side of the figure, and enter the other finger next to the larger lacrimal, and the other finger next to the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between the two eyes so that the fingers are equal, and raise the part where you elevate the eye, raise the entire chain over the one that has been sewn as recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When adjusting the corners of the plague's wound with a stitch, and treating that part which is healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	When an abscess or wound occurs on your skin, if it is painful and swollen, and if it becomes infected, you should clean the area with soap and water, and cover it with a sterile bandage.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	If any ulcers appear on the eyelid that the eyes have converted to, then use the same treatment as for an abscess; less suturing is needed in such areas.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Cleansing the wound is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	If you convert the eyelid and cut along the line that I have indicated; and then, using a small needle or a thin thread, make holes at the same distance from the edge of the eyelid as the distance from the eyelid to the corner of the mouth.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And if you have already sewn up the ends of each part, then use the thread.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Add a little subtleity to the end of each thread, and tighten the knots of each part as much as possible, and then lay it aside for later use, so that the knot does not come undone and does not break when the patient is moved.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If time is wasted, you should cut the intestine as soon as possible, and properly care for the wound that has been infected.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When the eye is closed, the eyelid is raised and the eyebrows do not touch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is how you should apply these remedies:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	This sentence seems to be discussing the measurement of longitude and latitude. A possible translation could be: "It has the quantity of length and width, neither more nor less." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise
Capitol .xii.	The text you provided is not in the language of the medieval medical treat
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	This sentence seems to be discussing the elevation of joint pain in the foot. A possible translation could be: "When the foot hurts, the joint pain is aggravated." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	This sentence seems to be discussing the operation of joint pain in non-natural feet. A possible translation could be: "When the feet are hard, rough, and painful, the operation is performed by taking a fine needle and placing it on a subtle cedar with a leon, and then adjusting the ends of the needle and notches as needed." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	This sentence seems to be discussing the length of the areas for quantity. A possible translation could be: "And it is the length of the areas for quantity of a palm." However, without more context
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	This sentence seems to be discussing the composition of another subtle area on top of the previous one, and cleaning the ends of that if you want. A possible translation could be: "And then place another subtle area on top of it, and clean the ends of that if you wish." However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	When you have finished the operation, place the patient in the same position as before, and make sure it is comfortable for the sole of your shoe so that your work is declared, which is a delicate and small operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Then insert the needle into the hole of the pelvis that needs to be tightened, and make sure it penetrates deeply into the eyelid so that the excess fat is extracted from that natural part of the pelvis.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then pull the pelvis inward and insert the other one into the axial canal, and there should be one or two, not more than that.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then pull the needle out that is inside the pelvis, and make sure it is not caught in the axial canal in the eyelid of the natural part of the pelvis.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If you are not caught in the axial canal and the pelvis is not caught, you will pull the axial canal at the parts that are left after you have finished the trauma of the wound that was caused by the trau sobira.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And see if that is the case, and if you pull the axial canal and the wound is closed, and close it with clamps, and leave it for two or three days, until the pelvis adheres to its place and covers that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the penis is too short, you should adjust it with a longer natural penis, and raise it if it seems to enter that space appropriately, and then you should lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitulum XXX.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the treatment of conjunctivitis that appears in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When inflammation appears in the eye, and the eyelid contracts when pressed on, either to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the plague or of a sore or cauterization, and this is called conjunctivitis, whether it is natural or accidental, and it is made by consolidation of the plague or of the sores or of cauterization, or because of its resemblance to them.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the forceps of the operation in it be that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place them in it as soon as they are between those two mechas of drapery, and tie them there when they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And you do not need to use cure for the eye of its causes that dry it out, constrict; rather if you make it so that it returns to inflammation with pus that no time has fire without.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	When using the remedy for that cause which softens the flesh, and mixes with water the urine of the patient, or the urine of another person, the one which is liquefied and is like the oil of the olives, and submerge it in that mea, and care for it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the recipe of your cure is that you pierce all the parts that are not solidified according to the form that focuses at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which they have said is not any correction of ehalixacrati that does not return the form of the place according to the focus at the beginning.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 124.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of ehalixacrati which is made on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ehalixacrati which is made on the eyelid, which is truly called ehalixacrati; and it is either of the natural kind, or of the accidental kind.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Most accidental ehalixacrati are made by plague, or by cutting, or by cauterization, or by other like means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of the operation of the patient is that you take a loop in which it makes double, and fix it in the flesh, and that the bandages pass from the lacrimal of the left to the lacrimal of the right, entering that fil passes through the ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh to the parts desired by the loop and cut it with that loop, and insert it into the wound.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if you return the figure of the eyelid according to what is covered, and if not, take the lens and fix that in the figured part, and make that convert the eyelid, and close the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two fissures of the two angles of the wound are such that it has made in between when they coincide, and that one of them is an angle when they come together, and that figure of theirs is.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	This figure is Greek: the letter.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh from that according to the quantity of the lid's edge, so that it closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with thread; and cure those that have been told of the mollifying medicines and the calgs within which they were once unhealthy.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you use an incision or suture or cauterization, then you should know that you are making a flat cut over the eyelids according to what has been said.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the calg from between the two lips according to what has been said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon on the cure of alxacrati when it is desired or done, that runs in the operation, according to what has been prepared by the form of alxacrati, and that is in the form of different motions.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artificer saves time preparing an engine in each hand that is possible to enter when it returns the figure to its natural form or part of it, and that one is according to what is convenient for the operation and the instruments in the larger positions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol.xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the attachment of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to some men who have their eyelid solidified by the album of the horse, and it is forbidden to move it or perform its natural works, then you should enter the extrusion of the eye from the eyelid, and raise it on that, or extend it with that.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And if you insert the adhesion of the spuma under it, which is not sharp like the sharpness of the scissors, it has a small part so that the thigh is not troubled by the operation, and keep the spuma that does not affect the horse with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And if your scissors are those that can exfoliate that adhesion, then return the eyelid to its natural form and make sure the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And if you put in the thigh salted water that you wash; or distill in it dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you separate the eyelid from the thigh with care and stop on the thigh, and then infuse on the album of horse, and use the third part for consolidating causes when it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	The text you provided is not in the language you described, but rather in Lat
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Translation: "Of the scar and the prominence of the eye lids.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You should know that unguent is made from two ingredients, one of which is nervous and resembles a thin cube; the other is not nervous, resembling a white, slightly damp substance, which when struck with a hammer or pounded, becomes easy to remove and does not leave any residue.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	Always consume the spices slowly, as they cover the eye and prohibit the light and its movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The hand of the worker in the incision of the thigh is that it pauses the eye in the upper part, and then works the handles of the thigh, and raises the eyelid to your thumb, and then applies the unguent with a small amount of duplication and extends it to the parts below.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then hold an agula and enter it into the same pelvis of a horse or a buffalo or a frog, or of something similar, or of a sharp point, or doubles the extremity of the agula little by little and places it in the meat of the unguent, and pierces it with the agula and makes it firm with the unguent; and extends it to the parts below, and scrapes off the pelvis of the unguent which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	When you follow that for the inside of the knee.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And if you insert the ramus in the socket of the lacrimal bone subtly or with small forceps, and examine the cartilage of the lacrimal bone naturally to see if by inserting it there are continuous fluxes of continuous lachryms.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if someone shows you the gland on the inner part or on the side, and says that it has been done, and that it is this form of the gland:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And watch that you do not touch the corneal layer and that it is in the rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And if the insertion is made in the wound a little salt is sprinkled or dipped in pus, and it is examined the next day; and the treatment of that is done as soon as it is healthy.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the gland is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, or it is not located in that place, then this type of gland is cured by medicine and is healed as you have been told in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you wish to separate that (part), then you should open the thigh and place smooth, sharp thorn of acute pointedness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	I understand. Here is the translation of the source sentence:
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	If that part is rarified and confined and penetrates into the same place, then you distill from your hand into the thigh of the sacrifice or the other part of the rog or the salted one, and fill the thigh within another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeat the operation over that part when it is completely done, unless that contrary to the aposteme be in the thigh, and then you should lay hold of that, and cure the beginning as soon as it becomes sound.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And repeat your operation over that part until it is completely healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The tear of the lacrimal cartilage, if it is noticed in the thigh for great pain, should be suspended on one side; and then separate that part and do not leave the separation so that you do not separate any flukes of the scars.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And if you distill in the tear duct roof and make sinus enter if it is healthy.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the scarification of aloe and of the water that is born from the flesh adjusted in the heel.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some wounds in the heels of aloe are born from flesh, and are placed over it when it covers the pupil or is approached or torn over the eyelids, or the eyes are closed with parts deformed and assembled on the edge of a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Measure the operation on that side because the thigh does not allow you to see in the upper part; and cut the wounds of that and close them all on that flesh convenient for the water, and use a forceps or a tweezer; and scarify the flesh at the beginning when everything is finished inside, and keep the heel that does not touch that for your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And is your scarification at the place where you scarify those or at the spatula which they recommend in the scarring of the unguent, or at small forceps which are closed according to the form of that this chapter has.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When the wound is fully filled and closed, and the entire flesh is covered with sal water, or distilled in the powdered roga, or resembles the powder of the corrosive medicines, and place your hand over the wound to prevent it from getting infected with gangrene.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If Roman alguacil recognizes any cause of gangrene and is careful to use cautery, and fears gangrene cautery, then cut the wound and treat that gangrene as it should be treated, and afterwards cover that wound with a dressing made of the skin that has been affected in this special case.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But mayhaps you cover the entire cure of the wound by natural or accidental means, and do not mean to operate on it in any of these operations until you see that member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collection of salt in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Salt comes from powdered roga which are smooth on the wound and prohibits the washing of the operation, and opens the wound in days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the pain is in the quality that is hard and not another type of wound, then you gather that kind of wound.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And is it that you command the thigh to hold the head upright, and suspend those veins as close as possible, and be sure that this one is of a subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or so two other ones gradually in another part according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And you gather those veins as soon as possible, with subtlety and subtility, and remove the pain as soon as you see those veins to be relieved of the wound and be refreshed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And keep in mind that you do not treat the wound with the extremities of the stump; and if your operation is on the outside, and you have to hold fast in your operation without any other veins besides those.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, you distill in the highest part of the wound or on the other side to make sure that this one is becoming more sharp and relieved of the pain.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all of this in one sitting, and you apply all of this that relieves the pain of the patient, and you wait for several days after the pain has subsided and the patient has been secured against the risk of bleeding.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And continue over the second that the medical personnel enters when the patient is cured.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing the head of the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat the nose with cauterization or acute medicine, follow this after the narration of the pain and do not engage in it unless you first apply pressure on the curette to the maturity of the pain, and remove all the moisture that is in it and it will be inside when the bone is discovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is discovered in the corruption or blackening, you should then cut it with a tool of this form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a sharp point, and it is made of iron, and it is rounded like the one that is made by punctuating with a needle or a surgical blade by puncturing subtly (like in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	When you pause that over the corrupt location of the bone, and turn it around among the soft parts, and press your thumb little by little until you know that this suppuration is formed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And if it is any wound, and then restore the place with causes of drying and stretching.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the place is consolidated and is good flesh in the wound and the body of the sickness is cut out and stays for 40 days, and it is not renovated and not patched and does not happen again in the accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	However, you should not be in the wound unless you reduce the fissure to the form of a nose, and according to this method: and it is that you discover from second bone or from acute medicine, and when you discover the bones, you take tribo second in this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	If the extraction of the bone is triangular, and it was the first one to be stretched into the end as many times as possible.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that over the bone, and that is from the lacrimal; and along with your hand a little of the hazel, and turn your hand with the tribe as it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the wound because it has turned back in the way that has turned back when you were there.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then, restore the location of the medicinal ointments that are drying out the skin as you would have used.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	When the flesh is enduring pain, you should return the matter that has spread to the surrounding parts back to its original position, therefore, place your hand on the thighs.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reducing the prominence of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel is prominent in its entirety and does not occur in the process of becoming null or diminished, you should lift the thighs, and then follow the path that follows, and then place the ventouse on the chest, and apply a liniment made of acatr, aloe, ensea, and sarcocolla, and then tighten the grip on the heel with powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the hand of the powder is what you hold from the leopard's hooves, and each hoof is doubled into four plates; and make of these plates.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the heel requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	When you apply pressure to those hard, dry parts; and repeat the winding around his incisions; and then remove the windings and loosen the tight clothing of the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	When the tendon is softened, you should make sure it is straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And cut the tendon at the appropriate time and in the way that has been said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the heel has already been reduced, then do so, and if not, then apply plaster to the powders and the stricture and the wounds that have entered and are becoming healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the inscription of the eminence of the uvea tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the uvea tunic, and it becomes elevated and proceeds outside the eyelids as if a grain of sand, and its shape changes, and you want to inscribe it, then perform the operation on that side as has been recommended, that you enter the hinge into the edge of the uvea from the side where you end, and place another hinge in the place of the lacrimal double part, and make it penetrate and lay the first hinge according to its disposition; and inscribe the location of the double hinge and raise that part of the uvea in the circuit of the hinge, and tighten that part.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	When you have extracted the uterus and placed it on the injected albumen in the book, enter quickly when the thread comes out of the grape vine.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And care for the uterus as this is comfortable for the person inside when the plague is cured.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some veins are found in the whole part of the uterus, within a circle of drap around the uterus, and they pass through the subtle pus that comes to the preon of the uterus, and run along the humid humorous tissue, and descend the uterus and enter it.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And stretch it when it is cured.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of gallstones.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This malady called gallstone is not simply the water that is adjusted in the uterus, resembling water from descending waters, and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The most difficult part of operating on the uterus is to seize it with the forceps and hold it, and then see if the water comes out through the parts that you see, and it should be dry and not descend, and there should be light, and this water will show the causes as they were.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not go down below, you know that it is wet.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent to the anus is not prepared, as they have said, then make the thighs approach each other and place a thin piece of sponge under it and put it over the cornea of the eyeball, in the corneal tunic (within the socket), within which the sore may be forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is forgotten, you distill the water from the tail in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already built fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And this cure is applied to the other causes within which it is healthy.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	The treatment of the water from the tail.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	As they have said, the specifics of the water in the division and what is convenient to declare, you do that second for the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	You should make the thighs approach each other on a pillow and place the tail in the hindmost part of the thigh.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your hand a little behind the eyelid of the tail that has the water in the right part; or if it is on the left, then in the left part.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And if you have the right hand open, hold it with your left; or if you have the left hand open, hold it with your right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And pause the extremity of the magnum at the edge of the corona for the largest bone in the album of the hinge of part of the lacrimal bone, and place your hand on it to support it and turn it with yours.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the album of the hinge and feel that your hand has already been introduced due to the wound.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And make sure that the size of the glove's opening is equal to the size of the pupil that goes into the end of the black, and it is the crown of the hinge; then you will see the pupil at the sight of the hinge because of the clarity of the cornea's tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place your hand inside the location where the water is, and then you will see another vein below, and if the water descends so much, then you will see the mouth of this water on the side that has the most sight, and the glove on the hinge.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	When a small amount of urine is excreted, then if the urine descends, you should remove that other tube that has not been plugged yet.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	When you are dry and not descending, then remove that plug with ease, and roll it around a little, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt from gypsum in the urine and rinse the urethra; and place a piece of cloth or linen soaked in rose oil and albuminous wool and ligature around the hollow.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	We and those of our time who have passed over this which has been eaten of our albuminous wool are in the same category.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey my advice to insert the tube into the urethra due to its hardness — which is common among men whose urethra is hard — then I advise you to take this sponge, which is called the "bladder" of the above, and this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	 Then perforate that conjuncture, and do not leave the tube inside, and if you do not have to, then insert it under the plug in a soft place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then enter the magdalene second as they have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	You must prepare the compliment of your work, whether it is in a bed that is comfortable for the patient to lie on, with their back on the bed, and is not allowed to move at all.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	If the limb follows its own disposition into the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	When you have approached that dark chamber and extinguished the flame seen, and look at some causes, and then return the limb within the thigh.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it does not matter if you do this in the time of the ceremonies or enough at the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It is necessary that you use this for so that the water falls on the ground with great and violent regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If you have an abscess, it is necessary that you let the pus drip out within seven days, and then correct that water that gives the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	If you have closed the sight of him and placed your hand on his face for the one who is regulating the vision from the future, he exists in that dark chamber.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then his gait will be descending gradually and conversing about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you know that in the alchemy there is not excused the disciple of vision some visions, and then you have angered about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us of the alchemy of those who are in the Artach, and the alchemy said that they make fire in the Ayrac magnanimous by perforating the one that succeeds the water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	When I say, "Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel," it translates to:
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	This are the forms of the species of mustard per that is over those, which ignores those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	When pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This subtlety is triangularly extended from the extremity to the other, with an acute angle at its end, as in this case.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol, section 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the treatment of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are various hardened flesh pieces of which one is the cause, which is assembled with Scorpio of motz feet or polyp eyes; and this malady is called polypus, as it resembles that eye represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of the flesh it is blackish, like cancer or a lapadea, and not of the color of lion's flesh.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, if in these flesh there is no cancer or lapadea, it is best to make the malady between your hands and place it under the sun, and humble the tips of the nails, and point the tip of the finger in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And if it is extracted from those parts, and if you cut it according to what you have understood of the hardened flesh of one part, and if you know that all the flesh has been removed; then, if the cause allows for an abscess, you must cut it with one of the subtle instruments with ease within which of the causes of the Roman.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lady has a wound or accident on her arm, then you should stop and rest that part; it is from the malignant boils, then you cut and cauterize that which is infected and leave the cavities empty.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	When the patient's nose is swollen and the incision is red and wet, it means that the body is reacting to the surgery. It is important to keep the area clean and apply a cold compress if necessary. If the patient
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is cleaned and the surgical procedure has moisture enter the mouth, it means that the patient has already recovered.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	When humidity does not penetrate beyond the skin, you should know that the flesh of nothing is found in the subcutaneous bones of the bodies of those who have not undergone abscission.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then cover the wound with a damp cloth, apply a poultice of herbs to it, and stop at every point in the quantity of the said or message, and enter the abscess and insert an extremity of the flesh into the arm at the elbow or at another part of the body where this is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And suppose that this will have been done, that the odorant is introduced into the canals of the arms, and is placed over the golier, which is too visible for the children to see at school, and is a cause for that which is being done.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And stop the two extremities of the wound, one that goes over the nose and the other that runs along the nose, and apply firm pressure to the flesh that is in the wound, and suppose that you know that the flesh is already in the wound.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And if you extract the tooth, and place it on the nose, and make an incision in the gum, and leave it for three days or more, until the entire area around the tooth has healed.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place a cotton ball in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you need more extensive care, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used by the barber to remove unwanted hair, which consists of oils and medicines in the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or gold, which looks like a small lantern light, as small as possible, and the meat looks similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a cotton ball closed as a cane, and the cotton ball of the barber's instrument for hair removal is flat, open; at which you hold it with your hand when you scrape off the oil or water that you want from the secretions and causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these are the ingredients for hair removal: recipe of castor oil, white wool, ginger, and peach pit, long pepper, escutcheon, and spice ananas. with sugar and water, and they make pills, and one is placed in the nostrils and is dissolved in water and is applied to the inside of the nose.
Capitol .xxv.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the provided text is not in a language
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	The text you provided is in Occitan, a Romance language that was spoken in the southern part of France and parts of Italy
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The translation of the given Occitan sentence is: "Women's faces are born in the extramittars of the nose, and they are magnificent and beautiful on most days when the day comes to see the look of the one.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	The translation of the given Occitan sentence is: "And for that reason, you insert that at the beginning of the appearance of the one, and you take all of that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	The translation of the given Occitan sentence is: "And then stop over the place or cauterize or use medicine that was in the place of the one.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	The translation of the given Occitan sentence is: "If it is delayed the insertion after it is magnificent, consider if it is made, hard, of black color and few sentiments, you do not touch that with iron that is apostema crancos; for those women's faces that are inserted this apostema ever by the great malice over that which that had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	The translation of the given Occitan sentence is: "And if the apostema is of the lion and not of black color, and sometimes it is possible to insert it in all that, you remove the thigh and insert this senes fear, and cure the place as much as possible that is empty and close when it is healthy.
Capitol .xxvi.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the source sentence "Capitol.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	The translation of the given medieval medical treatise line by line in English is as follows:
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when you encounter a solution for continuity in one of these cartilages, it is not uncommon to see this operation in only a few people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, when you find any of those causes, if you consider it to be fresh pain under the jaw, and adjust the lips of the wound with suture, and then care for that part which is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution for continuity are already separated, and each one is healed, then you should know that you should excoriate each part of its apparent wound inside when it is clean.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the lips of the wound with suture and tighten them, and over them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and essences, and place a powdered plaster on it or another consolidated plaster, and press it for two days or three, and then remove that and exchange the plaster and press it inside so that those parts may separate for themselves if they are separated, and care for it when it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	When the hand of the suture is that which you add to the solution of continuity or with needles as they have recommended in the suture of the stomach, or add the solution of continuity with your own and make it known to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Regarding the extraction of those causes that enter into the lips of the teeth in the parts of the dentine.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Waves are seen in some men in the parts of the dentine of their lips, where hard points resemble hard nails, and some are softer and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, cover the lips and fingers of each of those hard points in the entire part, and apply the dressing to fill the space between that which is restrained, and apply its wash to it and treat the place with what is astringent, within which is sutured, if it is cured.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Regarding the incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great waves are seen over the adjusted flesh of the gum that the ancients called alabaster, therefore, cover that with a bandage or have it covered with a bandage and inscribe its size on its place and let the suture run or the suture.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And pause over the area that has been dug or another powdered or excitating substances.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, you insert it secondarily and cauterize it, and place the cauterization so that it does not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of reason for teeth made of iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the parts that are too long, the gums and between the gums there are rough, hard, and some are black and are called yellowish or verdigris within which the gum is corrupted and the long teeth are the cause.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you cover the thighs between your legs and place the head of the patient on the top, and remove those teeth in which those rough and cause-like stones appear, and that are not caused by any other reason, and that is either black or yellowish and others that are deformed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	And if that is the case, then so be it; and if not, you repeat the reason over those other days and times and enter again when you want to reach the end of the statement.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	You should know that teeth require various types of incisions and figures, according to the preparation for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For so that the razors can reach the teeth of the jaw, and the razors that are used to shave the teeth in another way, these forms of razors must be prepared which you will use most often:
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. is not a complete sentence or phrase,
D’eradicacio de dentz.	This is a Spanish phrase that translates to "Removal of teeth" in English. It refers to the process
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cover that you cure the tooth of its pain as much as possible and throughout the entire removal of it, where no cause is found that supplies the vein of it when it is removed, where there is a substance that enters and exits during the removal of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the tooth is ready to be extracted, which tooth it is that is causing pain, four witnesses are needed to certify which tooth is the painful one, and then the tooth that is diseased is removed and the pain ceases within the tooth that is still diseased and has been removed, as we have seen in operations on beards.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Thus, when you need to certify what tooth is painful and whether you know how, if you cover the area where you scrape with your hand in the circuit of the tooth as it is in the gingiva of the whole part, then enter if that tooth has been dissolved from the tooth of the gingiva, or if it is sharp at the beginning, little by little entering until it converges to that concavity.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then, if you find it too difficult for good conversation or if there is too much pain in the head between the teeth that you hold which do not hurt you, and then treat the tooth secondarily with the hand that does not disturb it, nor cause more pain to the other jaw.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And then, if you do not forget, use one of those instruments, and place it on the tooth so that it is easy to remove the root that is made at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is swollen or burned, cover that area with your hand and firmly press on the end of the root with your thumb to prevent it from being crushed under the pressure of your lips in the moment of your closure over that tooth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	When you are working on excision very carefully with sharp dissection in the circumference of the entire gingiva and keep your strength so that it does not weaken or tear that part of the body, and return over the thigh for the greater pain of the patient.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what barbers do in their shaving and boldness over the eradication of them, since they do not follow what has been recommended; four ways come for the great men who are difficult to trim, and all their faces are improved, or some of those, or that one is taken from the bone of the mandible as witnesses have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And if the eradication of him is washed the mouth with vinegar or vinegar and salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is any flow of blood, as witnesses have testified, then take a certain quantity of iodine and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not stop, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and their subtlety are such that the tooth begins with a long extrusion, a thin handle and a large one, so that they do not bend when used to operate on those parts.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they are like times of a large handle that enters when the teeth are not bent, they are thin extractions.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And the pain of Indian iron is like the pain of the teeth that are thin extractions, and in the extractions of those there are teeth of the ones that some are inserted into others and are stretched by a strong descent force, and some are seen in the extractions of those is the form of the beak of an owl which has been called gallinagus, it is a strong constraint.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol. xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the eradication of teeth and of the stretching of the bones of the tridented jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When the eradication of the tooth that is tridented in Roman law is due to some cause, you have to place your hand over the area where it borders by one day or two, and enter or tighten the forceps on the extractions of those that are assembled at the beak of an owl called gallinagus or a similar bird, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	When the symptoms of their joint pain are like those of cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey my instructions and use these forceps or tools, you will find that I am holding the edge of the wound and tearing through all the flesh and inserting the instrument that is called this one, which is a small lever with this form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	It has a thin end and is not bent, but straight.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the wound is forgotten, it is; and if not, help me with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangle with an extremity that is a large one.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it is a triangle with a subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help me with this instrument, which has two slopes and the form of the following is:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And I will help you with other instruments that you should use when shaving teeth; this one is assembled like the large one and the form is:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	When the tip of the triangle is tortuous or short, and it is not flat, it is not suitable for this purpose.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And other wisdom that these teeth instruments are like the others.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisan suffers because he does not know what to do with the operation and the different diseases; four are of those diseases that the ancients did not have or use different instruments for their various species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or the other bones of the mouth are not flat or if they are swollen, then it is necessary to be careful about that in its place as much as possible that is convenient for the instruments and forceps that have been said in the extraction of the teeth, and this is the way:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any small swelling little by little, and it is pressed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak out because the entire bone is forgotten; and then restores the location with appropriate medications for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When a small fracture is found in the bone, you should note down that detail and its severity, and treat it accordingly to make it heal.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capital, Chapter 22.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth in relation to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth do not follow the natural course of the jaw, and this is more common in women and especially in those of a sacred age; therefore, I advise you to consider: if the tooth is nothing else but another tooth and it is not possible to reduce or apply a linament to it, then you should treat that one. However, if it is not annexed to another tooth, then you should insert this one into this instrument of which this is the form; and it seems like a morsel of pork, and it is made of Indian iron of extramittance mot aguda.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And is your insertion at the point where you insert it for too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it is not suitable for other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exfoliated, then you should apply iron of Indian type to that point, as this is the form.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	When all is said and done, it is made of Indian iron and the handle; and it has points like those that are caused by joint pain, like the tip of a needle, which is worn down over time due to the difficulty of the work, so that no other tooth can be cut or broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And place those in the hole, and fit them with those razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth is broken and the tongue is licking it, you should make sure that the edge of that piece is not sharp and not gnawed, and is covered so that the tongue does not corrupt and the word does not become corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol, Chapter 33.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of damaged teeth, use gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth in front are damaged by concussion and displacement due to percussion or hammering, and the mouth cannot be held over it with the hand, and you have treated that with medicinal stitches, but your treatment has not worked, then do as follows: use gold wire, not silver, because silver does not hold well in those that are strong, and if it is made of silver, it will turn green and become dirty after a while, but gold does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	If the female is in such a subtle and grievous manner that she allows it to enter between her teeth; and the form of the grip is that you grasp the female and hold the double of her between healthy teeth, and as much as possible, the curvature of the female's teeth between the bad ones, or if one or more, enter that the cloth passes through the healthy tooth of the other part.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	When you approach the affected area, stretch your hand as much as possible and know that it may not be comfortable.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	When your tight belt is in place, make sure it is not too tight and does not cause discomfort.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then insert the excess thread into the forceps or tweezers and attach it to any location on the handle, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the bad tooth, so as not to cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And follow that advice as if it were Roman law.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it slips or tears, tighten that or those with another belt in that manner for the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the dental arches of healthy and bad teeth, as follows:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return a tooth or teeth to their sockets in the appropriate places and they regrow as advised, they will remain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is all that can be done by artists and surgeons.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some bones are suitable for cattle bones and are made in the form of teeth, and are placed in a location where the tooth lacks, and are strengthened as advised, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The given text is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This language is a form of medieval Latin, and the sentence translates to: "This ligament that I see some eyes or is natural by the quality that this man has, or accidental and accidents due to the plague that has already been solidified.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation on this part is to open the mouth of the patient, and there should be no existence in the upper part; raise the tongue, and then insert that nerve cord following the latitude after the tongue of the recent one has been solved.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	When there is any pain or inflammation, and this has been done for the consolidation of the plague, then you should cut off that part and separate it at the latitude where the incision has been made in the limb and the nodosity has been dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	You must ensure that there is no gap in the skin of the flesh and that it does not split here and allow the sinews to flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And wash the wound with wine, vinegar, or vinegar; and then put down the tongue of the licent; and it is made such that holds the pain in any way so that it is not reinforced by another touch.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is a flow of sinews, place over the area where the cavity was made; and if the sinews are coming out, then burn the area with a pointed cautery, as it is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And this treatment should be applied to other causes that may be causing the pain.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital, Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	From the extraction of gallstones, put down the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some touches cause the tongue to be pulled out, which prevents it from performing its natural operation; and it is greatly magnified when it is swollen in the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in the tongue is that it swells the mouth of the patient in front of the soleil and considers the aphthous.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you see that it is of a dark or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain in that part, do not touch that one.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it becomes white in color and there is moisture, you should put the point in that part, and insert a small piece of sponge underneath, and insert the rest of the instrument; and if you feel any resistance during your operation, you should pause and take out the instrument, as it may be stuck in the sponge.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work when you have finished with the complement of the patient, and when it is washed and dry, take care of that part in another cure as soon as it is healthy; and if it becomes inflamed during the operation, stop and treat it immediately.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Regarding the extraction of the hemorrhoids of the female buttocks and of those that are not in the anus and of the others.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you cut in the anus, it is glands that are gathered together like cloth, which become deformed and are female hemorrhoids, which when you treat them according to what has been said in the division and they are not cured, you should consider if the hemorrhoid is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, you do not touch that one with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If the question is about color and the fat is large, do not touch that with your finger for the flow of the sinus; rather lay it aside within its mature state, and either you or she will handle it later.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If the question is about whiteness and the fat is thin, do that which is to be concealed.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The operation in you is that which you consider, taking into account the completion of the scar or if it has diminished due to any diminution; and you should seize the thigh by the sole of your foot, and the chin of the patient should be in the upper part, and the server takes between his hands the tongue of the patient further away from the instrument of noble quality of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	If it is made of silver or gold, and it is thin like silk.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then how you hold the tongue and show it to you the scar, and cover that with your thumb and fix it in that position, and pull that through the parts as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another cause for tearing the membranes, and applying that force with this instrument, is when the child is born with the head down.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is assembled like forceps, but the parts that are extruded are curved, so that the orifice of one of those is at the end of the other, which is sharp, and made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at your disposal, insert that sharp point of the instrument with which this is formed of the child's head: And it should be sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And perhaps you have inserted a honeycomb, insert the other according to this hand-made insertion point, and then the insertion should be guarded by wet feces.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If perhaps there is a flow of pus, guard it with wet feces, and if the pus flow is restricted, cure it within that pus flow, and make it healthy.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some vessels may be found in the groove of other stitches or in the same ones that you have mentioned for the honeycomb insertion, and insert those according to what you have said in the insertion of honeycomb stitches.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	When I have already treated a female with apoplexy, which was born in the abdomen of her, this apoplexy tended towards a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the abdomen of her, and the woman breathed straight, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and it had been brought to death by many days or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	When the aposteme had already suffered so much that it had made several deep cuts in its passage through two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then carefully and remain in one of the holes, take out that, and pull it gently, and tear it off from the large piece, and then carefully insert that into the other wound, and then carefully close the mouth of the post, and chew on its tongue, and then leave the hole in the aposteme.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then close a large portion of it, and do not run out of it except for a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Indeed the rule of that woman, and then began to drink so much water, and then eat less, therefore you did not stop inserting into that post many times for a long time, and that post was in its place instead of that, which was inserted when it was prolonged there.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore you apply hot and cauterize the rule of that woman, therefore also this addition; and then you walk around and do not wash what God made of that prop.
Capitol .xxxvii.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in Latin, Italian,
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	When the hernia is being examined.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the throat, and it is long and wide, then it is called a "node" if it is located at the end of the large and round part; and if it is located at the beginning of the small and pointed part, it is called a "gout".
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the disease is cured, and it is said that they have cut in the division, and it does not comfort your cure, and you see that the opening of the abscess has already been made and is subtle, then you cover the wound with a cloth that is sewn to what has been added round; and if it is at the end of that length, and it bleeds, of a dark color or black, and not to the heart, you cover the wound with the stitch, and in that you have fear for the thigh.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that second hand that you told of its whiteness and length, that you make to sew the thigh and press the tongue of the same with the instrument by which it processes its form and appertains the onion in the new, and take that down and insert it into one of two instruments that are called in the insertion of two mells.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And cover that only with this if it is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, for if you cover less of it, you will lose the ability to speak.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after covering it, use that which has been recommended in the two-hole incision, and care for that inside as it becomes healthy.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the thigh was swollen due to the incision, cover that which uses an iron in the cauterization of its fear, and the hand of the cauterant on it should not be but sharp cold water, and it is that you hold the mouth of the thigh in the upper part, and press the tongue with the instrument that has been said, and press sharp water that has been said in the capitol of cauterization, and make sure that this live one lives, and stop that not thin nor subtle, and fill that concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The extraviation of the cavity should be as the cavity of a culver of ray, and place the instrument of medicine on the vessel, and the thigh should be placed on the side per that which corrosive saliva or musellage of the mouth of that through intrinsic medicine, per so that not cause that same degree over the gallbladder of him and that descends from that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	When you approach the patient's throat, apply the medicine there, as that part of the body has space for about an hour after the pain subsides and becomes dull due to the doctor's treatment.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you wish, take the scalpel and wrap it around the end of the finger, and insert the scalpel into the medicine, then enter the finger into a cannula through which the scalpel adheres to that cannula, and make as many cuts as you can until you get the desired number of cauterizations on the grape, and apply the appropriate amount of dressing that will dry and fall off in three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you are told to repeat the treatment, repeat it, and remove the cauterization from the circuit of the grape with the scalpel inserted into the border, modify that amount of medicine that is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash it with water, and care for the wound with antiseptic, and disinfect the surrounding area when it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This special treatment is saved because I inserted it and made it long for fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	This appears to be a medieval medical text describing various treatments for different conditions. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	When the cold air passes through the mouth of the patient and reaches the uvula, it blocks the airway.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Then apply over the dry area and make sure you do not cause this cure to fail due to the tightness of the girdle, as too much will adjust in the girdle, and do not think that you are doing it, but rather the declaration of the girdle of the cauterization.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this instrument present, take a cane and make a closure of the hood, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, as the closure of the hood prevents the cold air from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitulum .xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of extracting spines and of what sticks to the groin and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Dry areas stick to the groin or spine of the eye or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, make sure you extract what appears to be in those areas, over which the tongue covers the sight, as you first put the tongue on the instrument, so that it is declared to you that it is in the groin.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When the patient does not show signs of being in labor and is hidden in the room, it is likely that the woman is vomiting because the food she ate is unpleasant in her stomach. Or that the woman defecates with a douche of water or a laxative of senna leaves, or takes a douche of seawater from Leon's sea lion, and holds it for a long time until the mucus transfuses to that place where her intestines are extracted, and then it is withdrawn.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you may catch an eel and hold it for a long time until the vomit is excreted, and then it is extracted; or catch a porpoise and hold its meat and water for a long time.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If the woman is not vomiting due to those causes that have been said, then you should use an instrument of this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it may be large and have a small opening, and during the extraction of the child, the mouth is made more accessible by you.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	When the patient's arm is raised above their head, and you guard the point of the elbow where it meets the shoulder, so that it does not hurt the bone or the spine, or so that the doctor can adjust the sling.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, that patient's foot is misshapen, because of its knowledge of the location of the cause and how it causes pain to be pushed downwards, and removes the hand from there using the instrument, as soon as the necessary quantity has been prepared.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extracting the swelling attached to the gallbladder.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the physician prescribes bloodletting for gallbladder swelling, consider that in the groin of the patient's foot, because you have expanded the tongue of the instrument that the doctor has recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the swelling, extract it gently or with subtle movements.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it, insert a concave cannula into the groin of the patient's foot, and place a heated iron on the concavity of the cannula, and make as many punctures (while the swelling is still alive and located in the groin) and abstain from giving too much water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And if you take a full mug of water and work it into the mouth of the patient in that way, and clean the mouth with it; and do not neglect to rinse the mouth thoroughly and wet the throat with a little water another time, as often as you see the patient swallowing the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not forgotten that they have recommended, you should smoke the thighs with cimiter or asafetida per the instrument they have recommended in the smoking of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, it is said in another way.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And this is another way of operating in smoking, as you take a roll made of charcoal and coal and wrap it in a covering made of a cap on the top of the instrument; and then remove the smoking; and place the thigh at the end of the canula and close the mouth so that the smoking is not forgotten until you know that the smoking is pervading the sanctuary, as often as the sanctuary cries out.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If the patient does not have a fever, then you should perform sublingual massage motions, avoid putting pressure on the thighs, eat salty foods and drinks, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that this diet be followed outside of the body.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument used to treat the gallbladder when seen; and it resembles forceps, but it does not have any curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The instrument that is placed on the gallbladder and its end resembles the beak of a stork, which is sharp, in which there are scratches from lime, when one comes across any cause, that does not last.
Capitol .xl.	Capital, chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this chapter is the sum of the sermon in accusation of apostates and in section of them.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The apostates are special movements, of manual movements, according to what is remembered of them, from each in this free one.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are different in perforation and section by manual movements, of which one is for the specialty of apostates in them puts; and therefore, when you come across water.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second hand is properly placed on the parts where the wounds occur on the body, as the accident in the head is different from that in the buttocks; and the accident in the fleshy part of the thigh is different from that in the joint; and to each of them, the operation is performed differently.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some wounds may be those that are not pierced but are of proper maturation of the sinus in those or parts of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other wounds are those that are not thorns but are of proper maturation of the sinus in those or parts of them. And if you delay the perforation of the member, it is because the sinus is not mature enough; and it does not cover what is not a result of decomposition, but rather that which is proper to the buttocks, so that the bone does not break and becomes elongated in the parts of the buttock, or it is a fistula or a fistula at the end of the member that is not healthy.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the time for the puncture of the gallbladder, and it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	When you know that the diarrhea of the pain and the cessation of the fever, and the decrease in the tremor and pulse, and the sharpness of the gallbladder head, and the other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when you know that the puncture is made in the place behind the gallbladder and from the healing of the eminence comes out.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should be made in the depth of the meat or the chest, if the gallbladders are in the parts of the thighs or feet, and in places where there are no reflections; and in all those that do reflect, use a perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the gallbladder is in the flesh, it is necessary to make a puncture when the digestion of the second complement has been confirmed; then if you puncture that part, the chest of the penis and the hard lips are prolonged, and very much the labia of the endured one and the depth of the gallbladder.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	When ties or knots are cut, they are usually done second to the latitude of the flesh or body part that needs it, or according to what the member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you make a small puncture, and in the large knots there will be a large and deep puncture or slices according to the variety of the size of the knots.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other knots in which the gut is convoluted and adhered, when you cut it, the end will be flat and the end will be in proportion to what has already happened, like that which occurs in many doublings and abscesses.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are not cut, there are three angles; and of those that are cut, the end has the figure of a thorn of a hedgehog, like the knots of the drawstrings.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those that are not cut, there are round and lunar sections, and they resemble those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	That which does not have the appearance of superficial knots like superficial leon's knots, cut it with a superficial or flat puncture, or as much as possible.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	When the gallbladder is large and has already been tied, which pierces that and does not let you catch it; if a part of it has been extracted, and a part is left inside on another day, and a larger part is extracted later, and motions are made according to the degree that is forgotten.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	If the patient is in a state of drunkenness, or a female press, or a small child, or an old man, and the animal spirit makes motions towards the exit of the disease, and more so the womb, and you operate on it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take this prescription with great caution, and your piercing in which you pierce these gallstones, cover that the plagues are driven away and consider if the plague of the gallstone is small, or a flat section, whether you administer the quarts of lip or antique horn; and if the gallstone is large, and the fissures of the piercing are motions, whether you pause mechanically in every tract that may come.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If in the abscess a part of the cord or is curved in that way in the circuit, you will know that you have completed the cut or the string as if you had cut pans or razors, with its moisture; and hold that within the third day; and proceed with that and cure the one that covers the engorged parts that were once sick.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the time of your operation, you should immediately administer cold water and apply it to the areas where the wounds are located, and place a cloth over the site of the flowing blood to prevent it from becoming infected.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the blood flow persists, you should make sure that you are administering proper care and medication, and applying powder as recommended in various parts of this free and divided country.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during the winter time, and the location of the blister is located on the nerves, you should make sure that you wrap the powder in cloth and place it over the areas to prevent them from becoming infected.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is during the summer time, and the wounds are burned, you should make sure that you place damp powder with water and oil on them, and take care of the blister as soon as possible, and remove the blister and administer proper care to the wound according to what is suitable for its healing.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And it is also necessary to know the treatment of blisters universally, but especially according to the type of blister that requires specific treatment for its cure.
Capitol .xli.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you've provided is not in
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	The text "Capitol xli." is not a complete sentence and does not provide enough context to understand its meaning. It seems to be a reference to a specific chapter or section in a legal or historical document,
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	I apologize for any confusion, but the text you've provided is still not in English and does not provide enough context to understand its meaning. It seems to be discussing specific types of bets or wagers that are included in a code or legal document, along with their corresponding motions or actions. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a accurate translation.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	I apologize, but the text you've provided is still not in English and does not provide enough context to understand its meaning. It seems to be discussing the relationship between specific bets or wagers and certain body parts, as well as those that contain humidity or
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	I apologize, but the text you've provided is still not in English and does not provide enough context to understand its meaning. It seems to be discussing the relationship between specific bets or wagers and certain body parts that contain humidity or are similar to polls, as well as those that are hard or durable. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a accurate translation.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	I apologize, but the text you've provided is still not in English and does not provide enough context to understand its meaning. It seems to be discussing the relationship between specific bets or wagers and the extraction of certain parts, as well as the fear or concern associated with this process. However, without more context, it's difficult to provide a accurate translation.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	When the operation is in section of those parts which you should press with that instrument of the kind that most suits, which is called an enterotome, when you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If this is the case that there is moisture, then cut along that section according to its length by cutting it at a surface level according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Begin at the section of line .B. and go to line .G. Then when the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape out that part which contains that moisture, and do not look for any other cause for this, as it may return if there is any such cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And if you find any Egyptian coins, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that wound with the plaster and keep it inside for another day, as this will corrode all that is seen from that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And repeat over that wound if you find any Egyptian coins accordingly and later if you wish, as you trust that there is no other cause for that film; then cure the wound with the plaster if it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If gout is present with large nodes, then you should insert your finger in this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	If the incision does not have a crooked form, and you place teeth between the two lips of the incision and pull on it until the entire part is extracted, and then forcefully remove the skin that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If you are having difficulty urinating, it is likely that you have a blockage in your urethra, and it is recommended to see a doctor immediately.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	If the aphrodisiac seems to have caused a cut and irritation on the penis, as you have reported; and if there is a cut on the aphrodisiac, it is likely that it is caused by a small amount of sand and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some people are allergic to these aphrodisiacs that are on the head of men who do not have much moisture; the cause is that you became sensitized over an aphrodisiac in the head of a woman's vagina and made it hard, rough, white, which could not be stretched, and if it was given to her, it would cause pain.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other cases, accidents have occurred in the head of the other aphrodisiac, not this one, which is similar to the aphrodisiacs that go to the heads of children and you should know the cause of these rashes, but all of this is only a superficial cut.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	When stopping the incision of those who have had a lower part of their body operated on, it is necessary to alleviate the pain of the disease in the parts that have been operated on.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And apply those remedies that are suitable for the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of incisions of scrophulas which occur in the chest.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Motes visible on these splints are placed in the chest and on the armpits, and some may occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the chest, and the motes that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is given its own covering, and it appears like that in the nodes and splints of the head, and like that in the places where they have been recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the specifics of these scrofula are motes, four out of which are some that are mineral, and others that contain moisture, and some that are malignant which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you see as good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color of water that is manifested is proper to the color of the skin, and is bad for all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the chest, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not pregnant, covering that you inscribe on that superficial dry part of the part which is from the part of the body to the part of the body of the line of .G. within the line of .B., and burn that whole part, and extend two lips of the skin from one, or from the other if you need those, as has been said in the splints of the head, and extract a little at a time.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	When caution is not taken to ensure that the vein or nerve is not pierced.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	If the abscess is not inflamed, that is not adjusted to your hand, or that does not disturb the patient, and that you have not already pierced it; then if you pierce the vein or artery and prohibit it from your operation, stop in the gauze that has been tied or other powders that are left on the surface, open the gauze, and lay aside that which has been repaired and made smooth, and it will become purulent and the gauze will become purulent.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the abscess ruptures.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation after the abscess has been filled.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And if you are unsure about the above-mentioned indication, whether it is due to any other small abscesses, then pierce those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the great vein of the abscess, then do not pierce that abscess from that direction.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	When a person has a severe pain in their chest, it is said to be a "heart attack" by doctors.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with the dressing that you have already cut in Egypt, and apply it to the wound.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you insert that entire scrophula, you should adjust the lips of the plague and cut out as much pus as possible without causing any unnecessary damage.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you ever notice that there is excessive swelling due to the size of the goiter, understand that you need to insert the tip of that, and then apply pressure and sew it together as it is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	If that goiter contains humidity, make a superficial perforation here at the location of the maturement of the intestine, and then stop the perforation so that it does not leak into the chest, as they have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And when you apply the perforation, make sure it is well-shaped and similar to those, so that it does not cause damage to the corpus.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you notice that the plague has already been washed, then you should care for that wound made of fleshy tissue as soon as it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 33.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the section of the pillow of the apothecary, an accident happened to the guitar.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	I cut the old part of this section in the pillow, and I have not seen anyone in our land who did that.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the text of the sermon.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the patient is afraid, then do as follows: extend the gut of the hernia as much as possible, and close it after it has passed through the canal, less evict the vessels of sanc if any cause them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then inscribe the line as it has been recommended; and it signifies over the incision of the canal by the flap which is of that eyelet which is of the cold humor and for the abscission of the vessel.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	When the wound has been cleaned for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the time comes to reinforce the hole in which the puncture was made, add some layers of the abdominal wall of the wound, and that's all you need to do.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And apply medications that help the flesh become stronger as it heals.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Albucasis says that the sum of the speech is that exposure is not just to see that the thighs have become weak, and the thigh has come to death, and the lung has entered, and they will insert the epigastrium so that the lung breathes over the place of the wound for some breathing, and it will be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command the wound to be cleaned when the malady of the wound has been consumed; and that is the malady for three days; and then you must command the wound in this way, and care for it as it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	That is why you have seen by my advice, that a vent is made in the thigh and inserted into the lung's chest, and it was inserted into one part of the canal of the lung, and you were called for the cure of the wound, and I cleaned the wound as much as the dead flesh, and discovered the wound and cleaned the sand that was in the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then you confessed that that had not been infected by veins or by the wind, and the rain was of the plague, and cured that which had been burned.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it would not have happened in the service if it had not caused pain in the vote, and approximately three days returned to the lordship of its possessions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now you say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Regarding the section over the scrotum that happens in the groin area, and it is called hernia of the scrotum.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hernia of the scrotum is called hernia of the groin after the color of the body, and it is found in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is followed by two maneuvers, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one there is no engine to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is followed by two maneuvers, one of which resembles nodes grasses, and the other maneuver resembles hernia caused by narrowing of the artery, and there is fear in that one.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	When you have found that and investigated it, and if it resembles any of the fatty nodes, and is not suspended from any vein, then you should insert it into the wound as the nodes, and extract that part which contains it from the flesh and bursa; and otherwise, you should thoroughly examine all parts, and apply appropriate care to the location where healing is needed.
Capitol .xlv.	54th Law
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Section of the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The nodes have specific types and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And do you advise that there is a difference between node and exitus as doubtful?
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore you say that in exitus there is heat and fever and severe pain within which the heat of the superfluity is sed, and it is completed by putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Nor does node have heat or fever or pain, and it contains that cipher leon which is in the proper sack.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is followed by the color of the body, and its beginning is like a ceze and is made as an ayss with a vase, whether major or minor, and there are two species, four of which are greasy and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are specific, according to what you said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When you arrive at the care of the node, which exhorts that and inquires about that from the beginning, whatever it is called intromes, according to what is found in its form at the head, which is this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	It is the duty of inquisition of all apostemata and nodes, and this sturment is what you hold and insert into the place where humor is present, which touches the apostema and you turn the ties saying "little by little, enter that one," knowing that the sturment has already penetrated the cavity.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then your last is after the measure of the size of the apostema, and you extract the sturment and consider that it is in the style of the one.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if it is forgotten the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, you must insert it in a superficial cut according to what I said in the other apostemata.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity of the style of the sturment, you know that it is heavy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry over it with a cut without a notch according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	When you are told to do so, and suspend that point on the nail, and gently clean the area around it with ease, and cover the knee or groin, if possible, over there and pull out that sore from the wound.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If something breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sore, and you must leave it as it is, and you should pull out the rest of the material inside that does not cause any disease.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If something causes a disease, either too much or too little, the wound will return according to the nature of the case.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that something causes a small part of the body to be affected, use some powders that are sharp and corrosive, strengthen the powder, and leave it on the one that sets the cautery, and treat that with another cure within which it is healthy.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the wound is large, you must cut off the edges of that and treat that with this remedy to cure it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the wound is pulsating towards you or away from you, you must cut and hammer the place where the glass was broken that has been cut and leave it for two days or three until the pus stops and the ebullition of the salve ceases; and return to incise as much as possible that causes the wound.
Capitol .xlvi.	The text you've provided appears to be in a language that is somewhat similar to
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	a medieval language, specifically Old French or Middle English. Here's the translation of the first line:
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	When it comes to the forms of intrusions, and they are of three kinds, which are the greatest and the smallest of them.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of intrusion that is greatest is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of intrusion that is smaller is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of intrusion that is smallest is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	These are painful, of iron, of the corners of the limbs in a manner that helps to hold the intrusion in place.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiences, and they are named after them, and one of them is called brady.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they are of three kinds, four of which are great, smaller, and fewer.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experience that is greatest, the form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experience that is smaller, the form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experience that is few, the form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems that these are for the bones and exits, and fistulas, and buboes, for that they enter those so of the bones and of other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	When the points are returned, they are large, like grapes, and are made up of great needles that are cut from salt, or from copper, iron, or silver, and the better ones when they are made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	They are points like the black plums, which are made to open the fistulas in their cavity, which are reflected as their reflections, which are reflected at their height and at those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	They are of three kinds, four times as long as the others, and the thinner ones, according to the quantity of the cavity and the stricture of the fistula.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the great plum experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The form of the smaller plum experience:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The form of the small plum experience:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the blisters are of special motions, four times as long as those simple ones, which have only one curve, and are of three kinds: large, few, and smaller.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their blisters or pimples, and of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	When those joints have curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	When they have three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	It is necessary for all that to be in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	A simple joint has the form of a globe, while the other has the form of a cone.
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple hinge is:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	A simple joint has the form of a ball, while the other has the form of a cone.
Forma de unci orp gran:	The form of a simple large joint is:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a simple large hinge is:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a simple large joint is:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a large joint has two curvatures.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The form of a hinge has two curvatures.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The form of a joint has two curvatures.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a large joint has three curvatures.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a hinge has three curvatures.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a joint has three curvatures.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives that are sharp and pointed, and they have three kinds: four of them are large, one is a hinge, and one is a joint.
Forma de scapel gran:	The first source sentence is not provided in the text you've given. However, I can
Forma del scapel migier:	The translation of "Forma del scapel migier" is "Shape of the larger sc
Forma de scapel pauc:	The translation of "Forma de scapel pauc" is "Shape of the smaller scal
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The translation of "Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquells sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema" is:
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	This is one of the forms of maggots, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, just like fleas.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large maggot:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of the medium-sized maggot:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of the small maggot:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	These are the symptoms that appear and how they resemble alcohol:
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the excretion of the punctured point that there is hidden sputum, and in that corner, among the parts of the teeth and gums, when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of maggots that are found between the teeth and not in the perforation of the gums, and there are three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventouses that are found in those where the flow of the vein is cut off, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of the ventouse:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These are the symptoms that appear, round in shape, with a certain length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	When these kinds of winds are present, you must use large, medium, and small ones, so that the fast-flowing fluids can be discharged in case of necessity, and you will know what to do when it is your first time without medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Do not use those winds to expel fluids from all parts of the body, and do not use them except in places where there is flesh, such as the joints of the limbs and the breasts, and the mammary glands, and the belly and the testicles and the eyes and the ears, and it seems like the flesh winds.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some wounds are caused by those instruments that seem to be smaller and similar to scars from previous surgeries; for which you expel the fluid when it is done through a flebotomy, or you have to incise the vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some wounds are round in this form.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the breasts of men who are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	This sentence appears to be discussing the swelling of breasts in men and women, and how it can be alleviated by wearing a garment that is similar to a corset or bustle. The phrase "compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz" seems to suggest that the garment provides support and structure to the breasts, making them appear fuller and more prominent. The sentence also mentions that the breasts of women are "assembladas" or gathered together, which could imply that the garment is designed to enhance their natural shape. The phrase "romano apostemosas" is not clear, but it may refer to some form of Roman-style bra or undergarment
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	This sentence appears to be providing instructions for treating a condition related to the breasts, possibly a form of mastitis or other inflammatory condition. The phrase "inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar" is not clear, but it may refer to some form of incision or cut made on the breast. The instruction to "excorja la groceza total" suggests that the affected area should be cleaned and treated with some form of medicated ointment or salve. The phrase "uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu" is not clear, but it may refer to the application of a medicated dressing or poultice. The final instruction to "ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura" suggests that the affected area should be covered with a bandage or dressing that conforms to the shape of the breast. The phrase "cura aquel entro que sia sanat" indicates that the treatment is intended to promote healing and recovery.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the breast declines and is softened by its own magnitude, like in women, it is necessary to make incisions in two parts, in two sections resembling the lunar figure, of which each part is contained in the other, if that line which contains the smaller segment of this form of the line B. and the line G. is the major one, then excoriate the skin that is between two lips of the sore, remove the dryness, and maintain what has been said about the suture and the powders that have been given in the cure, if it becomes healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not fill the incision of what is covered by the discomfort of the thigh and by flux of sinew, then it covers that the plague of the cot is submerged in the encounter of corrosion and lies therein within which that corrodes that is similar to the grayson, and maintain that within which is healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of gouts that come out of the thighs.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	When those that contain humidity are present; and those that contain humidity are of such a nature that they are not cut in the lunar section of this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And as all of this is evacuated, you will find the complete curve of the cotyle and its insertion into another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And if the curve is whole and intact, you can enter it when it is healthy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the section of the nodes' spines and scrophulas is, and if the scrophulas, you should cut over that area as has been said in the section about the scrophulas engulfment.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague is extended in such a way that it causes bleeding, you should administer this cauterization as has been said in this section.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitulum .xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of sections of cuts that occur by arch or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the arch is torn and the tendon is consolidated over it, then you should know that wounds and abrasions are caused by the artery or vein: four, when the wound is by arch, it is lengthened in the pre-coronary; and when it presses on the limbs, you will feel in it that it is stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When that which is by vein is given to the manifest of the body, it is given to the manifest of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	If this section is erroneous, and particularly in the part where the ankles are cut, and the girdles, and the collar, and the other parts of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary that the cure be avoided, and that which is outside or at the head also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Moreover, about that which is given to them for inflammation of the anus, they are divided in the abdomen; and it is proper that the division be unciform and that the artery be deliberated within what is discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place upon that hole and make it penetrate into the other thigh, and stretch the artery at two places, which causes and you have excessive extraction of many arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And pour the place which is between two limbs and let it enter where it is in you, and dissolve the section.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then, apply the cure in which the pain is generated after entering the limbs; and care for that one according to what is appropriate to heal it.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if an abscess is caused by a vein cut, you should know that you have to hold it with your hand as possible for the abscess at the site where you have held it, and insert the needle there, and make it penetrate; and it should be in the double fil when you extract that from the other part, and tie the abscess with the limb according to what you have said to me in the limb of grape4 of two parts at the extremities of the fil.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you think that you will extract the filament, then insert the needle through the entire abscess, and tighten the ties of the filament in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Clean the abscess in the proper location of the wound when it is and is what is in it, and then insert the superfluity of the needle, and leave that which is visible of it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over the bulb that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure that is made of calamus and essence that is found to be healing within what is healthy.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitulum I of the apoplexy which occurs by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	When one has had an attack of gout in the knee and in the vein, and it seems to have attacked the nerves when it is struck or when it occurs due to excessive work, and for some reason.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is necessary to make the point in the location of the assistant or the heel, or in all locations where the joint pain is located.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And the attack of gout is severe, and it is similar to the color of the other leg, and it is in the major parts of their disposition and when it is very violent, it seems like the gall is amazed.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And there is no additional pain in the chest of the body, and then the ribs are removed, and it is sore all over and does not go to the parts behind or below.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those who have joint pain, it is not necessary to be wrapped in iron, because the more you try to straighten it, the more it will contract.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	The point that is in the head or on the front of the chest is not necessary.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the gout is small, then use that point with care and avoid that one if possible.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, you should suspend that part with your hand, and exfoliate it, and remove that; and adjust the plague to the suture, and care for that within what is healthy.
Capitol .li.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	It appears to be written in a language similar to medieval Latin or an early form of Italian, Spanish, or French. However, I'm afraid I cannot provide a direct translation without knowing the specific context or the original language
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language I can recognize or translate. It seems to be a mix of different languages and phrases that don't form a coherent sentence or paragraph. If you could provide more context or clarify the source language, I would be happy to help further.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language I can recognize or translate. It seems to be a mix of different languages and phrases that don't form a coherent sentence or paragraph. If you could provide more context or clarify the source language, I would be happy to help further.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language I can recognize or translate. It seems to be a mix of different languages and phrases that don't form a coherent sentence or paragraph. If you could provide more context or clarify the source language, I would be happy to help further.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text is not in a language I can recognize or translate. It seems to be a mix of different languages and phrases that don't form a coherent sentence or paragraph. If you could provide more context or clarify the source language, I would be happy to help further.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The first source sentence translates to:
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If the patient's leg is swollen and painful, keep a piece of iron on your body; then take a firm hold of the recent point, and stretch that part of the hand, the one that has been said; and massage that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the stricture of the blood vessel; therefore, do not stop stretching the blood vessel as much as it can, until it is completely cut off and falls away from its own body.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the leg is large, then in the scar there may be a cause of fear and pain, and most importantly in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you cut the skin of the leg, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And after treating it, when it is healed, remove it.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And keep in mind that you do not cut the leg that is of dark color, with little sensation, of the left leg, and that is affected by cancers.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And when you come back, remember this advice.
Capitol .lii.	I'm sorry for the confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	The text you provided is in Latin and translates to: "A remarkable cure of the navel." Here's a breakdown:
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Here's the translation: "The cure of the navel is caused by various motives; either by fissures of the caecum, which is located over the abdomen, and closes the intestine or hernia due to other ruptures; or by stricture caused by a vein or artery, as it is said, or by narrowing of the abscess in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	When a fracture or tear occurs in the scapula, the color of the swelling resembles that of the chest; and the pain is felt from various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is for the exit of the intestine, consider the location of that which has been found, with less violent diversity, and as you approach that location, reveal; and then return; and much more is required of you, and the internal part must be well incised.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to humidity, the pain is felt and not concealed when you approach the patient's thigh, nor is it tightened, nor is it contracted.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is for the sinus, consider these signs as evidence of gout.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is due to nothingness, the gout is heavy, thick, and hard, and remains stuck to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to ventosity, touch the pain of the patient's intestine.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The operation in that part is to consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to sinus, or to vein, or to ventosity; you should know that it is forbidden for the cure of the patient, as there is fear and no one knows how to do it in the capital where I have described the gout by sinus and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	When the prominence of the umbilic is due to the intestine or abdomen, you should cover it with something that holds the abdomen in place and extends; and then make an incision in the circuit of the umbilic, and command what was inside to come out between your hands over the navel's two sides, and encircle around with a spatula on the umbilic's circuit over the location that you have sent it to with the intestine; and extend the width of the abdomen to the parts where the navel is large; and close or open and close the manicure of the belly button.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And if you extend the width of the abdomen over the belly button and introduce the said point in that indication to want the intestine; and if you have not atrophied or held by the belly button, then you should pull out and push the intestine to the parts where the navel is.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have atrophied the abdomen, hold that part with your hand; and insert the excess of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is contrary to your arc or vein, surround that point with your hand and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong places and insert two needles in the circuit around the abdomen in the manicure of the crotch, which threads penetrate; and tighten the abdomen on four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish, remove the beads and clean the area where the extended flesh and tissue fall; or insert it when it is subtle and falls, and properly care for that part which is covered by the tissue as it becomes healthy again.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the prominence of the navel is of flesh or moisture, you should cover that part with your hand as we have said, and if it causes pain or dryness, that which atrophies in it and covers the area, properly care for that part which is covered by the tissue as it becomes healthy again.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 33.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of a broken bone.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As we have said in the division, of the kind of bone fracture and in what manner it is treated by physicians, and that it should be considered in the treatment of the bone that the care of the physician does not cause ulceration; and as we have said, bone fractures are generated in the womb and the caution of the treatment of the bone.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they cut the ancient ones that some fractures are in place where it is possible to eradicate them, as for the crack that is in the breasts or in the thigh and seem like the limbs allocated to scatter all of that, and mainly when beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When the disease is well-established and advanced, it does not belong to you alone, for I have never been able to cure this in anyone else, nor have I seen it happen to anyone else.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	In the operation of this part, when it is allocated as we have said, it means that you precede and lay out the thighs and remove black blood from certain veins, and it is noted if it is significantly absorbed.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the thigh in the preparation required for the operation, and push into the groove those that cover it to that; and concave of the entire part of the codon so that it does not hurt when entering if there is no cause of the patient's pain.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And lay out the bandage, and do not leave that part bare, and expose the wounds, and cleanse the wound as much as possible with your hand or with the instrument you have at your disposal.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have any objection to using a large bandage on the vein or artery, then cauterize that within which the flow of the bandage is stopped, and cure it in another way if it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 5.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of hernia treatment.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have recommended in the division of the species of hernia from the water, and the sentences of each species, for the cure of the patient by the doctors.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	When that which is cured is of iron, it is not merely the specialty of alchemists alone, and is not approximated to the specialty of drummers or of hypochondriacs, but rather it is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	When you have already treated this special case of hypochondriac drummer with medicine and it does not satisfy your medication, then you consider, whether if the thigh has already been made smooth or another another one, as if it is in the belly or stomach, and seems like to those, you guard that you do not give iron, because you fear this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	May is when you see the thigh of exuberant virtue, and it is not another thigh but a hypochondriac so only, and neither child nor old, then you guard the maneuver of the operation of the thigh as it raises it between your hands, and the minister expresses the stomach of it with its hand, pours water over this part after the pentenilh, and takes spines in this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp end like spades; however, it may have small brevity little by little, so that in the operation it does not enter into the intestine, and you read that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	When considering whether the generation of gout is from the intestines, it is observed that you have sliced through the umbilicus with three fingers in the amount of three times on either side, above the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If gout is caused by the patient's disuse of the foot, your cut should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If gout is caused by the meatus, your cut should be on the right side of the umbilicus.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	It is not necessary that your cut be on the side of the abdomen that you want to lance for fear of causing excess bleeding in that location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then perforate the instrument throughout the codon, and enter it into that cut, and raise your hand from the codon to the siphac, and you expel that; and if the quantity of one unguent or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then perforate the siphac wherever the saliva reaches that location, and it is the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma: "When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This is similar to a fine silver canula; it is made of silver, gold, or lead, which has a small thorn at the tip and three thorns on either side: two from one part and one from the other part. It is then inscribed with the initials of the handwriting, as many times as possible:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	E in the exit of the instrument is a ring, which is worn on the armor, and when the instrument pierces the water, you should apply pressure on the instrument, so that the water is evacuated in the same quantity, which if you do not cover in the hour, then the body may resolve the spirit animal or come to the five pieces that are approaching the death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Mays evacuate of that second the quantity of the virtue of you and according to what means the dispositions of the virtue of the power of the will and the goodness of the will mean to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And take out the instrument, and release the water that causes it as much as possible, and hold it with the hand that is over the codena that holds the tool you are about to use on that second part of the hand.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and take out a small amount of water each time, and do this for several days to prevent errors from entering due to the water not being pure.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are afraid of the patient, and take out a large amount of water, cure that part in the sand, moisten it with water, and let it dry under the sun for a long time; and cure that part with desiccating medicines if it is healthy.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the mass fits properly with the extraction of water, according to what I have told you in water that precedes it.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol.lv is a website that provides information about Latv
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the care of the children who were born with the locations of the non-perforated urethra.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	This sentence can be translated as: "Sometimes, a child's abdomen is swollen and the head of their mixture does not pierce (or is straight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Thus, a cautery is made by piercing through the skin so deep that it reaches the inside like a soft thread following this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then, place a fine wire in the throat and tie it with that, and do this for three days or for fourteen days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the urinary passage is blocked and inflamed, and then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not tie the wire, it is possible that the urine will pass over this opening and not close this curtain.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Moreover, that which is tied in the throat with the wire of Plomb, as has been said, for several days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Moreover, those in which the throat is not in its place, this causes it to be low, that which is born and cut is due to the tip of the hood because it cannot urinate in the parts below, when it raises the hood above the parts below; and this generation is not possible, because the sperm does not reach the higher straight path, and it is barren.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	When the thigh is to be operated on, it should be placed over the patient's back, and the end of the horsehair of the same side should be pulled out with your left hand in a strong extraction, and insert the tip of the tail of the horsehair of the perpendicular part into the sore, as you would write with a pen, or if you do not know any part, so that it resembles the end of the tail and that it falls into the same place next to which it comes out.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that in your operation for the removal of a gallstone, four things may happen to you; and pause there at once and attend to the wound, and care for the inflammation within if it is cured.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 67.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the white that may happen in the perineum at the end of the tail of the penis and the scrotum, and the adhesion of the prepuce of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Things that happen to this white in the scrotum are seen with the eye and are made of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	This appears to be a description of a medical procedure involving the use of a needle-like instrument to make incisions on the skin and then apply a substance to the wound. The text suggests that this procedure is being performed on a patient with a "no-maligna" condition, which may refer to a non-cancerous growth or lesion. The term "cov" is likely a misspelling of "covi," which means "cover" in Spanish. The phrase "suspenseas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota" can be translated as "suspend the needle and cut through that entrance that encircles the entire world." The term "eng
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the wound is malignant, of a dark color, then you should cover that incision with a piece of cloth and apply cauterization to the affected area. This suggests that the procedure being described is used to treat both non-cancerous and cancerous growths or lesions. The term "enguent" may refer to a substance used for cauterization, such as a hot iron or
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the wound is on the prepuce of the penis, and one part of the wound is cut into and the other part is left intact, then you should cover that wound with a piece of cloth and apply cauterization to the starting point until it is consolidated. You should also care for the remaining part of the prepuce, as it may not heal properly if not cared for correctly. This suggests that the procedure being described is used to treat both non-cancerous and cancerous growths or lesions on the prepuce of the penis. The term "trinquat" may refer to a condition where the wound does not heal properly, which could lead to further complications.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	When one has already had children and grandchildren, and the old age has come, then it is clear that all that has been done before is denied and that it is being corrupted or corrupted; and it is proposed to put a line on that line, which is cut with flour of previous milled wheat and three thousand and ten times ground and crushed.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And care for that one by the other physician when it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is no flow of blood, then administer cauterization with moon-shaped needles in this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Four cauterization methods are used to two different positions, one for the flow of blood and the other for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the wool is corroded and destroyed completely in one hour, you know that you should insert into the flesh of the prepuce a catheter of plastic for so that the urine passes through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the attachment of the prepuce to the head of the wool (and this attachment does not happen except in that of the one whose prepuce is, and over it there is no circumcision; and when attachment happens by plague or by abscess) you know that you should exfoliate with a soft sputum when it is dissolved the liament and has been separated from the head of the wool in its entirety.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to determine those exquisitely, then you should know that you are excoriating some cause of the head of the foreskin and prepuce, and thus, when it is quite fine, it is easily pierced through its fineness by a needle.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the prepuce from the head of the foreskin by a thin layer of it, which is already moistened in the watery pus so that they do not adhere to another surface.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then you should apply ointment if it is well-healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol.lvii. (This appears to be a page number or
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the worldly education of children and the treatment of this that happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not the solution to continuity of health as with other plagues: but rather it is our operation and will, and the doing of that in the children requires the better operation and the removal of lost pus for their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on all free men, who did not use it in their laws, and nor is it because they had acquired by experience that the cause is that you have ruined the majority of artisans and barbers who used circumcision and worldly education, and use false lies and untrue signs.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	When I have already forbidden all these methods and did not improve the transformation of the patient, the transformation was such that the codon of the prepuce was hidden within four layers, the codon of the foreskin within two layers, and furthermore, the tonic was placed there, and then the pain was soothed.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	When the wound is cleaned with aloe vera, and it is digital, which is used by barbers, it is not securely sealed at the end of the male member, for it is often inserted in the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, I often see iron and corrode your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and there are no visible movements in that manner that do not require disinfection, and you have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Less disinfection that I use for the forceps and the limbs, the quality, my experience describes to me, that the forceps are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is used is as the sharpness that is left; and thus if you prepare your hand with proportionate two sharpnesses, and insert it secondly after a compression in time; and there is compression of the limbs in the figure containing the umbilical cord of the whole part, which does not make an error of the whole.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The manner of the first operation is that you make the child major by making it larger if it is of those that I understand as small, which you do not do except that you read the foreskin on the penis only, and you see that he enters another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	When you have achieved that pleasure in totality of that manier that is possible for you to receive your intelligence, then...
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And make that to be between your most statued hands, and not be seen as a disgrace; and hide the forfices in your mouth or further down the thigh, so that the child does not see those or use other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And place your mouth at the root of the penis and blow into the anus, and remove that which is inside the head of the penis, and modify that which is added to it due to impotence.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And tie the place with a string that is marked, and tie a knot on the second limb with a small one, and tie it to the end of that, and then close the place with another limb, and insert between two limbs.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And lift the anus up towards the shoulders and straighten the head of the penis; and make the scarlet powder small and small, as much as possible; and sprinkle some dust over it and on the dust sprinkle a little of the olive oil that is recent and warm; and place that over the other day, and care for that in order to heal what is healthy.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the grippers in my creation, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	When some are external and the others are internal, so that it is not the same as the length of the lock, and the length of the dovetails is like the length of two manuscripts' pages.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	When there is an error in world formation, it is often the case that one seeks to escape the innate code entirely, or to separate from it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is important that you extend this to your own time and consider the apothecary's wares at the location and that they are equally divided.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot have it with your own time, then take it from another and insert it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If it has been three days and the apothecary's wares are still not inflated, then you should enter there when it is ready for the apothecary to excrete that easement and insert the second one that is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And keep the head of the wares from being in that place.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then cure this wares that the plague is condensed from the powders which have been recommended in the treatise of the powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is inserted over the code according to measure and follows the divisions of these, then you will not notice it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	When it comes to treating that gout that they say has been cured within, it is said that...
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol .lviii. is not a complete sentence and does not provide
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	When there is a retention of urine in the bladder, it is caused by swelling or hardening of the kidneys or by inflammation or scarring, and appears similar to what has been said about the hands of those who have undergone medical treatment in division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not dissolved, and you see a retention of it being due to kidney stone which has already reached the colume of the bladder, then you should cover the thigh with a cushion.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the feet of that person over the thigh and extend the abdomen from the side opposite the thigh to the other side, and the abdomen should be tightly drawn as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then you should constrict the colume of the bladder with an espulsion of the kidney stone to the parts behind, so that the urine is completely dissolved.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If not, it is said that the cause is very serious over the thigh, then you should cover the abdomen with an intravenous administration of the instrument called a syrinx, which is of silver and subtle lion, as follows: Of silver and subtle lion, with a long tail like the palm of your hand, at the end of which there is a subtle canal, like a palm tree, from which a subtle canal extends to the top.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	When performing a urinal examination on the patient whose penis you grasp and whose urethra you expose for good drainage; and enter the extrusion of the foreskin into the area beyond the circumcision, and insert the forceps if there is any excessive hair from the foreskin, then introduce it into the canula with vehemence and thus close the circumcision with the border and the album of the wound.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And cover the patient's private parts with the sheet, and cleanse the vesicle of the patient and the surrounding area with soap and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And enter the circumcision as easily as possible into the opening of the urethra; and double the prepuce at its tip towards the glans; and pull the circumcision downwards towards that; and pull that downwards into the opening of the urethra, and the prepuce should be entered as far as the cause of the wound, and do not rush to follow this order unless it causes harm.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And extend the foreskin little by little until the urine seeps through the hair.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	When it is necessary to remove the urinary bladder and use a catheter, do not stop until you have done so and then use a catheter inside until the bladder is empty and the uterus relaxes.
Capitol .lix.	Capitol .lix. is not a complete sentence and does not
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	The catheterization of the bladder should be done with care and using appropriate instruments that are compatible with the patient's condition.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or aphthous lesion, or a burn is found in the bladder, or there is a coartate perforation, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clamped catheter, and this is the form of it:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	However, if the removal of the bladder is closed, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that case there are three ways: two from one side, and how many times you need.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is located in the area where the catheter is inserted, and that is the one that is emptied, and the second quantity that is added, when any cause is removed from that drawn by the humidity, is ejected, and when it is expelled, it is expelled, and when it is expelled long, the one that clamps the catheter is the one that is heated with naptha in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When you want to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the catheter into the moisture, and apply it to that part which is pushed into the parts of the bladder, so that the moisture is applied to the cavity of the bladder.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And insert the end of the catheter into the urethra according to what has been recommended in the ring; and apply the moisture to that part which is applied, so that this moisture penetrates into the bladder as much as possible, and the thigh centers around that.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the cyst is such that the bladder is cysted, and this is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And if it is necessary to make a point of silver or lead, of which the cap may seem like a small pen, and then the needle will be directed by the limb.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And grasp the bladder in motion, and stop at that moisture which you want to cyst in the bladder, and place it between two hands as far apart as possible, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the crystals into the groin.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then stretch the vagina with your hand over the moisture that has entered the groin, as that moisture has already penetrated the vagina.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a vagina, then take a glove and make a circle with your thumb; perforate that through the entire circumference; then insert the circle as far as it can go, and add more circles if necessary to hold the moisture, so that you can control the amount of moisture you want.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that in the instrument and make it as tight as you made it in the groin, and express that with your hand as much as possible before the moisture reaches the vagina.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of urinary stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	In the division we have already spoken of the kinds of urinary stones and their treatment in medicine, and the difference between stones that are generated in the urethra and stones that are generated in the bladder, and their symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	The text seems to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	When the stone is generated in the true vesica, it is that which is located in the vesica itself.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And you report this to that excellent example of manifestation and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, say that the stone generated in the true vesica directly affects the child; and of the doctors' sons it is that the urine that is expressed from the bladder seems to be water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the thighs cover their genitals, and moisten the pubic hair, and are dressed; and they cut off the anus in that way.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is said that the care of children who have reached fourteen years of age is easier than in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Less in the young is tolerated by heat than in the elderly.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which the stone is more severe and the cure is less; and if it is fewer, it is opposite to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, how to reach the care of that, come at the beginning of that which the doctors call the church's remedy for the bladder, which extracts the entire fence that is in the patient's thighs; then that fence has some veins prohibited to the peyra, and you must do the investigation of that.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And if it is near the thighs and is soft and moist due to which the stone descends into the vesica or jumps from one place to another, then
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then place that cheese between your hands and the other's legs, so that the entire uterus is flat against the parts on the side.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	When it is necessary to cut through that and the entire deformed part.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel pain in the area, then cut as little as possible around it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If the pain does not reach the entire foot, then cover the toe with oil if it is left intact, or cut it off if it is a child, or use the mentioned remedy if it is an adult, and insert it into the cavity of the foot.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And if the stone has entered the toe when it was outside.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually convert that small part into the vaginal opening.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on that with your thumb and expel it into the parts of the vagina that you have cut.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the midwife to press on the vagina with her hand; and command another midwife to extend the fingers of her left hand into the parts where you have cut, and hold the cord that is left in front of the location where the incision was made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And insert the sponge that has been prepared for this, which is the form of it.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut it into two parts, between the foot and the genitals, not in the middle, near the left thigh; and the incision should be on the stone and the toe that you have cut, and it should be a transverse incision, so that the incision is wide and does not become too tight after the amount of the stone that you have taken from the foot, and not too large, for if the stone in the foot presses on the penis, it will cause its damage.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	You should know that there is one type of stone that has an angle and borders, for the treatment of which it is difficult to make a remedy by itself.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that water, it resembles a stone, and is round, and is used for the relief of pain.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	So if it is the one with angles and borders, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not a remedy for pain, know that you must apply something over that, or gently press on it with your hand, the end of which should be like the one you press on the stone, and should not cause discomfort; or that you insert a subtle curved instrument at the end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot apply it over that, you can amplify the tube a little, and if you see a flow of pus, decrease pressure on that by heating it with sulfur.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is less than one, you can at the beginning push it into the mouth of the cavity, and then insert it inside; and push a little water in; and seemingly make if your waves are fewer than before.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If a large stone is present, ignorance is that you have inserted that large section into the groin, for which one of the two causes may occur: whether it is dead or has turned into the continuous distillation of urine, therefore the place is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	When there is an unnecessary expulsion of the child from the womb, or when the engine is in the fracture of the thighs and comes out through the holes, it should be stopped immediately.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and sanctuary of dragon's blood, and tighten that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place olive oil or rose oil and vinegar on that cloth, or olive oil and red wine, to make the cauterization stick.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And place the thighs on the table, and do not slip the limb through the first day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that has slid, wipe the place with vinegar and oil, and treat it daily and every other day with ointment, until it is healthy.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound cauterization is made, inflammation and cracking, and as if the sanctuary is in the frozen vagina, and for that they prohibit the use of the said ointment (and it is known by the discharge of urine), then enter that ointment into the wound and extract that sanctuary, so that it does not cause the vagina to corrode and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When the fever has been reduced by vomiting and purging, and it is suitable for the patient to be cured within the remedy, then...
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover the entire course of the treatment during which you lie on your side and adjust the medications that have been placed over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the bladder, and it sticks to it, and urination is prohibited, then treat this as you have recommended so that you may reach sectioning, where many cases of this treatment have been accused of sectioning; and you have already done this, and this is the form of the perforator:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	Of a triangular external incision, sharp, and fixed in place.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And pull the bladder away, and leave the stone behind in the bladder so that it does not return to the urethra.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And enter the iron into the bladder, with ease entering because of that perforator which comes to that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	When you revolve the drill around your own leg in that small hole, and you drill through the drillhole of the other part to prevent it from entering another part, then the urine will be completely emptied.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And press your leg down on that which is swollen in the area behind the groin, where it is twisted, and is forgotten by the urine, and the thigh becomes healthy.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	However, if this cure is not for you due to any reason that prohibits you from doing so, then place a suture on the drill hole and another suture on the other part of the drill.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And close it over the drill hole in that groin between two gashes.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And remove the ligament and modify the scarred part, which is made in the plague.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	However, if there is no need for a ligament to close the drill hole, but rather to prevent it from returning to the cavity, and the other ligament is not, then when you unwind the suture from the drill hole, the knot returns to its place and drains the plague.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	When it is necessary for you to have the patient lie down, that you raise the gown to the parts thereof, or that you return the usual complement, and take the plague away from there those who have said so.
Capitol .lxi.	I apologize, but the provided text "Capitol .lxi
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	De extraccio de peyra de las femnas" translates to "Extraction of urinary stones from the female genital
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada" translates to "Urinary stones in the female genitalia that are
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras" translates to "If you see urinary stones in any of those, the cure is difficult and forbidden by strong hands.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	When the female has a strong pain, it is one of the symptoms that appear.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is wise enough to tell the doctor when she is in labor, or if it is one of the women who have given birth.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not know this art, especially the operation.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section over the bladder in women is longer than the location of the bladder, so it indicates the need for a more extensive section, and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If you are afraid that this will happen, then you should know that you take a wise woman, and it is not easy.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are not afraid of this, then you should know that you seek a wise woman, or present a wise woman who is experienced in the art, or a woman who is in this art and has partaken of it.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore make the presentation and command the one who will do everything you ask, from the inquiry about the bladder to the beginning; which causes is that he looks if the woman is in pain, know that you put the end where you want in the crotch of him and that you want the bladder.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If that becomes worse, cauterize that part there, and command him to place himself on top of it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not seen, command the midwife to insert the part there into the cavity of the patient and place her hand on the left side of the vagina, and press that well.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If that becomes worse, you should gradually decrease the pressure on that part of the vaginal orifice as it moves away from the head of the penis until it reaches the corner of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And place your hand on the corresponding part of the patient's abdomen wherever it is to be found and center the clitoris on that part, and he will not feel any pain from the cauterization done previously.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; and place the ring on that section, and if you feel the clitoris, command to make the incision according to the amount that is known to be the size of the clitoris.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	You know that the parts of the clitoris are different: four of those are small and large, hard and rough, long and rounded, and have no ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	There are several ways to interpret this sentence, but one possible meaning could be: "You know how many species there are for the patient that you want to apply the remedy on." A more literal translation could be: "You know the number of species there are for the
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you see blood flowing out, adjust the area where the gallstone was removed and stay there for about an hour until the gallstone is completely separated, and then return to your operation once the stone is outside.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	When you prepare yourself with the necessary tools and say in the extraction of stones in men, so that you can help those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you see blood, and know that the expulsion of the stone is from the ureter that was incised, then place powder over the spot and stretch that am pulvils and stricture descent, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract that, for fear the patient dies.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And cure the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the acuity of the stone is reduced to a manageable level and the area becomes wet, then return to your operation as soon as the stone is outside the body.
Capitol lxii.	Capitol LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of sectioning over hernia accoza.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not simply an addition of moisture in the white circle which we leave the coden of the generative containing the hoof, and is called the cipher.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some veguadas are in the proper pannicol which is prepared naturally in the part of the hoof, if it is that another hoof; and is the coden of the generative between the white circle which has been said, and it is not allowed unless tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to inflammation, which occurs in the generative parts, as this material is enveloped there, and some occur due to striking a point on the generative parts.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This humor has different colors, whether it is the color of the red or bleeding, or black excrement, or white putrid matter, and it is said that it decreases.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The ways by which this addition of water is cleaned are as follows: if it is in the white circle that has been said, then you should apply the aposteme red and decline a little along the longitudinal axis as a figure of a hoove, and appear the generative part, where the humor counts that of all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humor is in the proper hoove, then you should apply the aposteme red and decline a little part of the hoove and some believe that there is another humor.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humor is between the codon of the generative parts and the white circle, then you should remove the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	When you want to know the color of moisture, if it is necessary to expose the color of moisture in the posture that follows the cautery; then, after that, judge from the vestige of the cautery, as to what part it belongs to.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when you come to the treatment of the wounded arm, you should cover the wound with a cloth that is flax if it is possible, and sometimes the part of the cheek.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if it is necessary to lie down on the back over any cause for a short time, and stop the movement of the limbs.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And if you lie on the left side of the patient, and order the minister to stand on the right side, who extends his arm from the hip to the two sides of the shoulders and the parting of the navel to the chest.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And if you take some water and divide the ribs of the lower part of the patient's back by the length within a few inches of the navel.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And if the cut is correct if it is distant from the line that should be the belly of the ribs, within which the white flesh of the chest comes to the finger.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	When you exfoliate, observe, and keep your hand steady so that you do not injure yourself; and your exfoliation should be with the part of the body that you are exfoliating, which is suspended by the hair and scrutinized according to the quantity you can possibly handle.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then make a small hole in the container of water and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two lips of the section of the intestine and extend the container to its parts; and do not touch the cord with the fingers that comprehend the genitals, and insert the container into the hand that you can possibly manage.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Then insert it into the body either vaginally or anally, and mainly the secretion that is subtle, because if you do not scrutinize the insertion of the container very carefully, it is not guaranteed that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the intestine is processed in the area of the patient's genitals during the operation, when you have completed the section of the container, return it to its place, and adjust the lips of the cord of the genitals according to the suture, and care for that water as the others do, if it is healthy.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the man's heart is corrupted by another malady, you should cover the veins that are causing the pain and remove the heart, and then care for it as they have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the wound is divided into many parts, you should know that these are hernias; therefore, insert it in the next place where you have made the incision; and if you see that it is an operation, you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you remove the scar, and enter the submerged layers of wool that are immersed in oil or rose oil; and put another layer of wool that you have submerged in oil and rose oil, and expand it over two gallons and the mirror of the belly; and put away doubled folds and powders, and tie them with the ones that follow this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then you tie the two ends and the folds of the wool that are covered with carmine according to this resemblance; and they are points at the ends where they are pressed by the horn or dry hair, and they are added to the structure in the belt of the belts, and one of the ends presses the buttock inside the two, and the other end presses the pantile's point, and two extractions over two thighs and two extractions on the other hooks, and all the narrowing is adjusted in the belt of the belts.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	If some of these hernias are medicated artificially with cauterization instead of sectioning with a sharp knife; and that you take a subtle cautery and insert it into the codena of the gintils, and then ignite according to what has been recommended if the white cipher containing water is discovered, and you then take cauterization in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It seems like there is a Greek letter involved in the text, but without the specific context or the entire text,
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	and then you burn that cipher, and it is ignited when all the humidity is outside the container.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	and then extend the cipher by one unit, and scrape it, and scrape the subtle cautery that is lit; and insert it next to you as far as you can when you have eradicated all of it; and keep this fire away from you as much as possible.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than an incision operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	However, if you oppose cauterization at the time of sectioning or at the time of cauterization or injection, you should know that this contradiction is for your own good, and you should cure the one that causes it according to what is suitable for you.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	When the patient's thigh is painful and fears the second operation due to its horror, you should administer the second dose according to what I recommend; and when you are sure that you understand, for the sake of the meanings given, that this hernia is incurable.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	You should cover the thigh with a cushion raised above the ground, make a perforation in the middle of the lower part of the abdomen, and stop the perforation after the length of the course.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if the wound is wide, it will completely cure the inflammation.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place a bandage over the wound and hold it in place with something, so that the inflammation does not spread.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And cure that after the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	When the pain is contrary to the egg of the inflammation at that time, and it is not done only because the white pannicule in the orifice of the plague causes contraction and prohibits the excretion of urine, you should cover the plague with a pen or instrument of the kind from which the urine is extracted from the bladder, the form of which is preceding; or adjust in the urine's oppression a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	You should know that the urine returns, and it is excreted after about three months or less; and when it is added, you should be perforated second by that same hand, for the patient to pass the days in bed.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol, LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Section on the treatment of hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You should know that in this section there is fear of pernicious effects in the larger parts; because I have seen the release of it and its preservation for the better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that and the specifics of the stitches.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, say that the stitches are made on the chest of those whose breasts have been constricted and are caused by sudden acute inflammation, which is caused by the accumulation of blood in the breasts, or by a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the stitch is according to the color of the chest, and it does not cause any pain in that area, and it is a heavy stitch.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the stitch is very tight, of which the color is dark, and it does not cause any sensation in that area.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	When some swellings are caused by constriction of the arteries, and by inflammation of those parts that have already been felt as painful, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It is known that inflammation of the arteries is caused by the distribution of the pulse when you press on that part with your thumb; and it does not matter if it touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	It is not that which is caused by inflammation of the veins is dispersed by any cause from the pressure on that part;
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this special occasion there is a section over the other parts and under the chest; and it is that you insert the code of the genitals, and extend the head to the parts thereof, and extract that from the white, and cut the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and inscribe the suspensors that you extract from that whole part of the parts of the head;
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the head is already fixed on those solidified parts, then you must know that you extract the head and insert it there;
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If adhesion occurs between any cause of the gallbladder, or within that which is between the belts, you must cover that entire adhesion with your hands and insert it into that through an round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the adhesion is from flesh in the place where it is behind, you must cover that entire cause with your hands and remove all of what is of it, as they have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	When your operation is completed, you must fill the wound with lint soaked in red oil and vinegar, and apply that to the other care taken within that which is cured.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitulum LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of hernia that is from a wound.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A postulate is wrapped around by some wrapping that resembles a cord of softening of the testicles, and it becomes difficult to make movements and walk over the thighs.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this affliction, there is fear for what precedes the remembering.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, cover that you say operation in that second which was done in the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	It says that it is necessary to cover the vulva with a high pillow; and raise the suspensory of the testicles to the parts where it ends; and tie the codpiece of the genitals to the thighs that you can see on the belly; and hold the other ministers that you, and extend them with force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then insert the sharp needle through the skin in the middle of the thigh, after the veins are discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scrape off all parts that you have said in the extraction of the arrowhead, which are in the templates.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place an awl in which the double point is true, and fasten it at the first of the places where the wounds occur, and fasten another one at the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then insert those in the middle of the long part of the thigh, after the long parts of the thigh are cut, and extract that which is added with the wet and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And cure the plague by curing the other plagues in which you want to be born by means of which the thighs do not yield to one of two testicles, and that is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If one is affected by all the symptoms, then you should know that either the testicles are prolapsed or the testicles for this reason are placed in the bladder, because it is devoid of all nourishment due to the incision of the bladder, and it is fixed, or it is placed there so that it is not well-suited to those.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	About the treatment of inguinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the anus of the right side of the abdomen, which causes the intestines to be pulled out through that rent in the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the cipher or of excitement of the intestines, and it happens due to these specific causes: striking, pushing, pulling, lifting a heavy object, or seeming.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the symptom of this, when it occurs due to the extension of the cipher, is that it happens gradually over time and not suddenly, and it causes the tongue to apostema into the throat when the cipher compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	When the symptom of the gallbladder is felt in the abdomen, and at the beginning it causes severe pain suddenly; and afterwards, various apparent symptoms appear from the region of the spine, and this is due to the intestine, and it affects the parts affected by the gallbladder.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And some parts of the intestine are forgotten by the gallbladder, and this hernia is called an inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And some parts are formed by inflammation, and some parts are found in the gallbladder, and here they are held back, and there is great pain and more severe pain when it is pressed, and some parts cause worsening and more pain.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the symptoms of this disease, fear is had, because it is feared that the caustic will be avoided in that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the mandible of the operation of this one is that you command the abdomen to reduce the intestine to its place in the parts affected by the cavity, and place it over the patient's collar between their legs, and raise the changes of the patient.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And if you want to cut the rib that is cutting the testicles in half, and insert the testicle completely through the hole; and then fix it in place with sutures of the same length as those that were used to close the incision for those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the hole is smaller than the quantity that you can possibly make it, then it will be forgotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And if you remove those knots that are in the testicles, and then find the white, hard knot of each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you should enter the said thing in such a way that it goes into the testicle, in such a way that it is between the white knot and the codon of the hole, and then between the white knot next to it, and release the adherence that is in the part behind the hole.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if you want to cut the rib that is cutting the testicles in half, and then extend the white knot on both sides, and raise the testicle with the codon to the hole's part; and command the minister to extend the testicle and dissolve the adherence that is behind the filled solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	When asked if there is any cause for the intestine being wrapped around the white, hard bone, it is said that there is none.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you suspect that the white bone has any cause, then press on that with your hand to the left.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And if you take a needle of the size that has a thick point, and insert it into that, then go through the bone to the left, which is the part of the hip, the qual is the end of the testicles, which is divided; and if you insert the ends, which are four in number, and place them on any figure in the crotch, and he said that the bone of which it was said that it is the end of the testicles is fortunate in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And if you envelop the ends of the feet and hold them firmly, so that any part of the vessels that do not pull on those do not cause any cause for concern from here, so as not to get gout carpal.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another vein of the same size alongside the first one, three times; and these two veins are from the bone of which it was said that it is the end of the testicles, according to its size, and insert all the remaining ones in the same roundness, and leave the foot.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And you should insert into the side of the end of the testicle's tail, where the sac and the cord run, as they have advised in order to prevent it.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And apply wool dipped in oil and rest on the thigh; and apply the ligament that they have advised (and some white veins are burned, which they say about the incision of the testicle's flow, four veins fall into those) and tighten the ligament so that it does not slip.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the pain of the testicle is delayed, apply cold water to the tail and rest over it so that it does not fall.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And care for the thigh with another cure of the wounds within which it is healthy.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of a ventral hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia there is not seen what has been done with the patient's thigh during the cure of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first things that were done with it as they have advised in the hernia which they have made; the which is that you lie the wounds over the incision on the side of the patient's difficulty, and dry in the middle of the abscess which I ordered to this, within which the veins may fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	When the plague has been treated according to what has been said, and it is known that it is healed, then... (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
Capitol .lxvii.	This appears to be a citation or reference, specifically to chapter 67 of a
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	When the disproportion that is found in the ankles, then... (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some have seen that the ankles rupture in this way, and they have removed the location... (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not blame the generals for any cause of the intestines in the generals; and if they do, it is rare; and return to its place in all hours. (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged as well, a slit is made in the gallbladder when it is desired to place the intestine in the gallbladder; and this happens due to the extension of the gallbladder which is in the ankle as has been said, which causes the gallbladder to extend, and it becomes softened and the location from which it was extracted is removed. (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is by cauterization as has been said before in the story of it. (Please provide the complete sentence for translation.)
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	When some wounds are treated with iron according to this method: and that the thigh is placed on the patient's back, and the area of the rupture of the emerging nails is cleaned, it is found that the temperature of the skin has risen by three degrees.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And apply pressure to the white spot that is inside where it has been discovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then grasp the ring and place it over the prominent part of the white spot, and press it on the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then grasp the other end of the white spot and adjust it to the end of the ring, adjusting both of them.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then remove the end of the ring and do not cut off the white spot completely, nor extend the hole, nor cause any other cause as you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And treat that as in the treatment of diseases, and when you cut off the fields, cleanse and restore the disease inside that has been solidified; the white spot contracts and is not adjusted to the prominent part of rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this place, where it is pushed for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 88.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the testicle cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Watched motions of the testicle cord in healthy men are softened by heat where the flesh that is between those is softened, and the appearance of the region is improved.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When it is necessary to examine the patient's thigh in the course of their treatment for the disease that caused the wound on the leg according to the doctor's order, and to cover the entire wound with the bandage that has been softened over the natural skin; and to adjust the lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, in the beginning, the excess of the softened bandage is divided into three or four parts and is fixed with a suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then insert between the sutures; and after the cure of the other diseases that come when it is healthy and the wounds are healed,
Capitol .lxix.	Capitulum .lxxix.
De castracio.	Chapter on Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, and it is not necessary to remind you of this in this book; but only one or two hands are needed for the memory of the physician when he is entombed in that, which knows the cure of the animal that caused the castration; and the other hand is to drive us to have castration of other animals for our benefit, such as by motions, and mouths, and jaws, and pigs, and appearance of the animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting, or by making a slit.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case of castration done by cutting, the way of the operation is to cut the animal's tail, entering it between those parts that are soft and flat, and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And hold those parts in your hand, entering them if they are flexible and not seen outside the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In the case of castration done by cutting and slicing, you will have the animal and press the noose of the testicles of the other side on the male.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And tie the strings, and insert them over each leg of a cut made between two legs that have been processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And insert those parts that will have exfoliated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not put anything on those of the cipher above, except the subtle cipher that is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This way of castration is better than the one done by cutting, because when cutting it causes a strong effect on the testicles so that the animal does not want to fight.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And after the wound is healed, pay attention to it to see if it has become infected.
Capitol .lxx.	The first line of the text is "Capitol .lxx." which
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	The second line of the text is "De la cura de hermafrodozia." which translates to "Of
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	The third line of the text is "Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels." which translates to "In men, Hermaphrodisia is the second treatment: one or both of the man's genitals may appear as if they have an opening, between the two testicles, there appears a female's vagina in which the male's penis is placed.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	When certain urinary pearls are found in the scrotum of that male.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In females, there is a specific: and it is that the female's belly is situated over the penis as if two testicles of a man were present, and as the pubic hair of a man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	 The treatment is of three kinds: of two males and one kind of the female.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you are knowledgeable about those adjusted cuts and when the disease of that disappears, and that you cure the other diseases with that treatment.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men, where urine is found that is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	 Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of the leg and the wound caused by female causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	 A severe leg is often adjusted according to natural causes when it is erected and the leg is observed; and some pearls are magnified in some females as if they were spread like in men and through the act of coition.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	The first line of the text is not in the same style as the previous lines, it seems to be a separate sentence or a different part of the treatise. However, I will try to translate it based on the context and the language used:
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	When the wound is not finally healed, mainly at the root of the finger, because it does not allow the flow of pus.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then apply this cure to the wound that is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	The flesh that is inside the leg is flesh that is inside the leg, and it is easily torn apart into parts similar to a coat (and for this reason they were called "buttock wounds" in the past); therefore, we should cut it as slowly as possible, and cure the part that is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capstone 72.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is that the man's leg does not have a hole, or if it has a small one.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is because of the disease that has preceded it, and that is either due to hardened flesh or a subtle cipher or a sharp edge.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is either on the root of the finger, or on the sides of the toe, or on the sharp edge of the pus, or on the base of the pus, and it forbids cutting and twisting and stretching, and it forbids menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	When the knowledge of that is to be gained by looking at the pulse, if the apprehension is apparent, proceed; but if not, then closely examine those things or the rays.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the apprehension is not apparent, then carefully examine those things or the rays, and cut and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And if you place your hand over the cheeks, and pause the tongue on those indications of blood that are most recent.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And if the woman is on her side, and the thighs are extended, and you extend the cheeks as far as that subtle one is broken and the apprehension is relieved.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And if you take and bind it with string and press it on that place, and leave it there for the day that that place is not yet solidified.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the apprehension is large and spacy, then cover that with something that you have not yet inscribed on that, either with lava or with myrrh.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the apprehension is by flesh, then suspend that there and inscribe that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	When you have given the patient the medicine that stops the flow of his stomach's pain, it is necessary to give him something to eat and drink, and to rest, and to apply ointment to the wound.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And provide a wide-mouthed tube for the plague not to be consolidated yet.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for the Alcus Jorn's sake and administer cold saliva.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And be cured by the other cure of consolidation when it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some things happen in the main country of other animals, and it is necessary to follow this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is for acephaly, the acephaly which is in the head should not be made with contrary force in this manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of red blood that happens in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated of the openings of the veins that are more than those that are continuously inflamed, and because they are old and are made with contrary force in this manner.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I have already said in the division the specifics of those and the symptoms of those, and I direct you to those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Then say that hemorrhages and pains occur when the blood flows into the larger veins and do not appear to be in need of treatment. In those cases, there is no need for treatment.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Among these are those that are on the large veins over which they feel pain, and those that have been cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And cover that you place the female on a hot cloth and extend it as far as possible, either over the fingers or over the skin, and insert it into those who have pain.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And powder over those with the excesses of the saliva from one of the insoluble powders, which are similar to those and seem to be those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And rub the feet for an hour, and then place it in warm water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the excesses of the saliva persist, then make that serum in decoction of sumat, coriander, and other similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	When preparing for the first application, take fine flour and comfortable clothing, and mix it with honey to make a plaster that is comfortable on the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the wound separates, it is; and if not, attach it with two nails, and scrape off the hardened matter from the edges.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Take wool and dip it in the fat of a calf, or the fat of a lamb, or the fat of a goat, and apply it to the wound; and afterward care for the wound so that it heals inside.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the Lord guide you to understand what I say, so that you do not confuse this with the second thing I said earlier in this language.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for the wound so that it heals.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capitulum .lxxiv.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of the uterus, an accident happens in pregnancy.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Specific types of apostemes occur in pregnancy, such as cramping and aposteme lapident, ulcers and sores, adhibition and eruptive and herpetic and hemorrhagic and rash and thil and other apostemes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	When I have already spoken of these diseases and their symptoms, and the remedies for them in division,
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	When you inquire about this matter of gout in the chapter of apostema, which is the most common among the apostemas that are colleged, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of the same is performed with iron, then proceed as follows:
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the apostema in the head at its beginning is sharp and due to percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it constricts and if over that sensation, if not for perforation of the same, and cure that apostema as soon as the acuitat of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then if you consider that you make the female on a bed which has several pillows; and lean over the head and adjust the headrests on the part where the venter is, and the thighs are expanded, and pause the headrests near the thighs, and lie down comfortably for this purpose.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And the midwife follows the right side and administers the instrument which is used to open the most, the form of which will be in those causes that they do to follow.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you wish to administer this instrument that you have made for the female's vagina, and it is important that the instrument does not enter more than the opening of the vagina and the lower part of the thigh.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the previous one, then you should cover that with powder on the texture of the previous one so that nothing else can enter the previous one.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	When you have placed the string that is running through the instrument of the latch and have held it, the minister will rotate the string as soon as the orifice of the larger one has been opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the inflammation appears, and it is touched with the hand and the thumb, you must know that this is the head of the latch that has been swept clean.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the sore is evacuated, you must know that you should place in the plague a submerged machine of olive oil or red olive oil in which there is at least one stiptisitat; and place the calce in the section in the preon of the larger one.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place the deformed thigh and over the damped wool that is submerged in water in which there are built badges.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it will be cured in about two days when the doctor has found out what is appropriate to be given to you to become healthy.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some of the wounds are washed with water and the plague is made to drink water that is mixed with honey and mead, and in the water in which it is built, whether it is made from lilies or long-term aromatic herbs, it returns to the doctor.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the plague is caused by the more severe type, you should cover that part of the body with the doctor's cloak, and have them treat that part of the body with the remedies they have mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capital LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Teach the midwives how to handle the waters that are useful for the women's doctors when they come to the second, unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural child per halls of it, and because when you see the woman express her parts and desire to smell the air, and over there is cut because over it is the part, and quickly the amniotic fluid is the second figure natural, and the umbilicus or suspended or hung from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	So when you see those parts, you should cover that the belly of the woman is covered so that the fetus lightly descends when it is over the head of the child, descends to the second part, and is washed with those excess parts for good washing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	When a part of the body that is not natural and not usable becomes inflamed, and when the fetus is lying on your feet and the part of the body is facing the head of the foot, and the leg is one, or at the knee, or the head of the foot and the leg, or at the abdomen of the foot, and then it is converted over the shoulder, and resembles the figures of the unnatural parts.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you are showing the whole figure of those, and which engine is used in those to be significant for this and to be over this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the point is placed on the natural hair of the head and that is very strong on the woman and is made in the difficult part and sometimes the virtue of her is weakened, then do that seizure or let her hold it, or let her hold the hair of the man and evaporate the fenugreek and the olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	When the midwife inserts the placenta between the patient's thighs, or if it is necessary to do so inside the vagina, or if that is the case due to the swelling that occurs in that part of the body due to moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen inside where the fetus is coming out.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not come out, it is possible that the woman's cervix is filled with pillar and fig gum, and other things.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And order the midwife to open the cervix and push gently; and put your mouth on the woman's and she will push for an hour, until the fetus comes out completely.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the woman does not deliver the fetus at the beginning, it is possible that you need to reduce those little by little in difficulty.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If the woman does not obey the command, put the woman on a pillow and lift her legs up, and place the pillow on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the convulsion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the hands are not formed and do not fit, then you should insert them into those and remove the fat from the foot or tie it to the waist of the patient's clothing and remove that equalization, so that it will not be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	When there is swelling of the embryo on the soles of the feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the joint is above the feet, you should cover that which presses on them, and convert the small foot, and convert the little hand, and convert the nail of the finger and extend those small parts one by one.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	How much is it that you enter between the thighs, you command that he expresses himself, and make him extend his hand, and if he forgets to do so, then God will help.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if he does not forget, as I have commanded, you return the small part by part to its place where you placed it when you paused that second natural figure, and then he will forget the first suffering.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited as I have commanded, you take a piece of linen and gum dissolved, and apply it all over the mortar with good percussion, and line up all that you have according to what I have commanded, and place the female's part below the belly of him.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And make that ceze in water beef, when you have achieved the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When sometimes the parts of the patient have become softened, then do it under mirth and under pause to that.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigacio lasts for an hour, then you should place a cezala on it, and make it turn and extend the mouth of the patient, and take from there, and press the part that is lower on the abdomen of the patient with a gentle compression, so that the following part does not get forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyes on the feet and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the foot and hand follow this form, then you should engage your fingers one by one; and the woman should stand with her feet on the bed, and her legs down, and those should be spread apart, and close them together.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And press on the abdomen little by little, and take out that which is left of the feet from the shoes that is prepared in the part that is lower on the abdomen.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot is not forgotten, then you should hold the feet and move them with great force, and press on that which is over the hip bones little by little until the foot can be placed in the parts of the patient.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	When you insert your hands and swallow the small piece by piece, and command the woman to express herself when the piece is fully inserted.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Observation of the small intestine lying on one of the patient's thighs.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Your task is to reduce the hernia of the patient, if you cannot do it, raise the woman and make that one come out.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it does not come out, place the pillow on the bed, press the thighs of the patient with strong impact, and apply ointments to those parts that you recommend using with mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the pain comes, place the poultice on the belly, study about reducing the hernia, swallow the small piece second in nature, and make her vomit and command her to understand that she is fully inserted.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Observation of the small intestine lying on the left side of the patient's thigh, with the mass of the patient expanded and the belly of the patient on the right side of the patient's thigh.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife holds the hernia of the small intestine and rotates it piece by piece, and that it is easy to do.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When it comes to when one is about to vomit, and you pause over the patient's throat where they have been told to apply oil and mucilage.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And if you command that he takes small sips, and when he has vomited, you place a cup under one arm and command him to lean it against the wall, and then command him to close it; and make it vomit again with condizine.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the fetus is prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the woman is about to give birth for the second time after this labor, consider, and you should insert your finger into the vagina as soon as it is dry from being evacuated from the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hung over the face and neck of the woman, you should insert your finger into the belly button, so that it does not get stuck and suffocate.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And press the fetus between the parts of the teeth as soon as you remove that second one that was in, and command the woman to breathe if she feels any dizziness, and the air will be expelled outside, if God or the wind wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit means "exit" or "emerge". The word "geminorum" is a genitive form of "gign
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	The text is discussing the causes of multiple births, specifically triplets or quads. It suggests that these are not common and can be unexpected, but they are not the only cause. The text then implies that there may be natural causes other than those already known.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here is the translation of the first source sentence:
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	If these symptoms are difficult to determine, then consult the natural figures that have been described and treat them as follows:
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	If the matron has joint pain that is caused by gout, which brings ease and subtlety, and delays, and is skilled in following the entire figure of the physician who prepares for her to be cured.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering this that is formed from the matrix by embryos and are destroyed.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some are formed in the larger ones, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and eight, and ten, and you must now verify that a woman aborts at the fifth, and another at the tenth, which causes pain due to the measurement of the divine saws.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And thus it is said that in the science of the woman there is often a case where she appears to be pregnant and then aborts, and therefore she stops doing that.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus, it is said in the division of medicine that it does not cause any harm, and you should use caution, as you consider if the woman is of good virtue and not of those accidents by which she suffers loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is lying on her back with her head inclined towards the edge and her buttocks raised, it is necessary to...
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The physician should hold those parts or place them on the bed so that...
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And moisten the mouth of the older woman with...
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And apply the ointment to the midwife with...
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And suitable places for application: then consider if the foot is prepared to be placed on the head, and you should keep your fingers in the crevices of the toe, or in the collar, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or on the chin, or in the shoulder of the patient, or in the axillary regions of the shoulders, or in the armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the prescription is for the feet, you should apply it to the toes or the back of the shoulders.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	If you hold the patient's arm, and stop the curvature of it in that place where the opposite elbow of the left side is located, and enter the hand easily and keep the elbow in the same places that have been mentioned, entering when the cause becomes apparent.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then pause and keep the other hand in the appropriate position, or the third one if necessary, so that it is not extended too far, and does not extend beyond its own rightness.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Make sure to cover the entire part, so that the application of the eye is made as it is in tooth removal for the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if you cover that which is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, make sure to cover the mother with your hand on those parts that are mentioned and turn them over to those that are held.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the part of the foot is forgotten, make sure the points are moved to the place where it has been placed; and do so until all the foot is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	When the woman's thigh is swollen and it is not possible to reduce it by means of compression, then you should cover that part with a cloth; and take out that which is outside and insert it either in the joint of the thigh or in the groin.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And if you cover that part with a cloth on the other thigh and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When the head of the fist is large, or if it causes pain in the compression, or if the mouth of the water jug is adjusted, then you should insert your finger between the sharp spikes and cut off the mouth of the jug, or take out that which is inside with an instrument called "alundat," which is the form of the other instruments in the capital, this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly if the fist is large by nature: and you should cover that with a cloth, or take it in your hand as they have said; and take out those bones from the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and it is compressed, then you should cut inside so that the humidity which is in the chest is dispersed.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated, and there is no obesity, you should insert the needle as far as possible at the location where it can be inserted most easily for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the end of the stomach is blocked or in the hernia, you should cover that opening where the moisture that is inside passes through.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the stool is on the thighs, you should attract the feces with your hand and lead it to the mouth of the patient.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and chest are hard, you should cover that opening with something that will not compress the belly and exit through your mouth, and let the abdomen and chest open so that the moisture inside can pass through.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are still there and you return the needle to your mouth, insert it into the left side of the mouth; if the patient's mouth is blocked, insert it into the left side of the mouth, and draw out the needle through the left side of the mouth, and insert it into the patient's mouth with one or two needles, and pull it out with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mouth of the patient is cut by scrofula, which happens to the face, then you should cover it with something that does not cause pain on the face; instead, cover it with something that can administer a drizzle of wet oils.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow the patient in ointments that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the gout is on the sole of the foot, then you should if possible apply an ointment that is an ague: and apply that which they have said in the foot.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if it is not possible to apply an ointment, then you should be inserted in pessaries, and be extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure that no other cause distracts from the second part.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your operation, apply that which they have said about the cure in the scrofula that happens to the face.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if phlegm flows from the sinus, then apply ointments with warm oils and administer another cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman in the belly of which was a gout, and placed over that focus another taken by hand, and that focus dead is the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to some people at a certain time that they have an attack of gout in the sole of the foot; and it begins to swell as soon as it is touched, and then begins to become red and hot.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called for the treatment of it, and treated it for a long time, and the inflammation was not subsided.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you examined it for some causes, applied a strong ointment to it, and examined the bone, and passed your hand over it for a long time, and examined another bone; and you were too surprised to see that there was no bone in the stomach.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So you examined the inflammation, extracted the bones from it, the female existing in the sole of the foot, and had been used for a long time in this way, corrected by a small piece of gut.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you did not think it strange, but rather knew that this is what is known and helps in this that the artificial joint is made by the hand for the care of the patient.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From among the forms of instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of ventilation used in which the larger part is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strangling in which the free ends are engulfed, in which engulfment has two benefits at the two extremities of two fetuses:
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this advantage may be difficult to understand, and it may be made of silk, or of iron, or of bronze of boys:
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And if the latitude of each fist is twice that of the two thumbs and the margin of each is one thumb, and the length of each is a palm and a little more, and the longitude of each is twice that of the two thumbs or a little more, then in the middle of two fists, the adjustments of those two are made, of which the longitude is a palm and a few more, and the latitude is twice that of the two thumbs or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are intermeshed in the mouth of the larger part so that it can be opened when you turn the prescribed virtues:
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera: This sentence is quite complex and seems to be discussing the appearance of something that resembles a subtle or
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps. This sentence can be translated as: "It is a sign of gout, either from the big toe or the little toe, according to the re
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so deux additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz. This sentence can be translated as: "However, in the extremity of the two added parts, and the length of those added parts is twice as long as a palm, and the latitude of those parts is two thumbs.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu. This sentence can be translated as: "And when you want to open it wider, do you make the female over the leg of the foot pendulating, opening that which is between the thighs of the leg.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols. This sentence can be translated as: "And when you open it, do you use the instrument as if it were a forceps according to the quantity you want of the opening of the mouth of the wound that fits the one you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of which they described in ancient times:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of driving out the wind that drives out the foot:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of sweetening the heart that is told in the great head:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with forceps that the teeth are in the extremity, as many times as there are, and some are made longer as many times as forceps follow this form, as many times, at the quality of teeth that are fixed and told.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of sweetening little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The form of an unc having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The form of an unc having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps that the teeth are in the mouth, at the quality of the foot's cap is told:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The form of saliva having two ends at the quality of the foot's cap is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The form of two spatulas made:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All of these instruments are exercised, and when you multiply the species of this and prepare them for the artificer, as it is placed in its operation and place, and it is given to the men according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	When you have already finished using those instruments, you must immediately remove them, as the need for these is not justifiable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second one.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second one is held, you must hold it with the child's hand that holds the part to be held, and apply pressure on the affected area with your hand on the mouth of the patient and over their nails, and if necessary, squeeze it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if so, you must take a glove and pierce the covering with a nail and hold it on the lips of the older one, as it is like honey and rum and anet and camamilla and arabic cassia and santaurea.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the glove, and hold it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a corn of coconut in the mouth of the older one, and hold it until the vapor comes to the concave part of the mouth.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make it as it has been said, and the second one will be removed quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	When the patient is unconscious and not responsive, you should command the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or almond milk, and then enter the vagina and search for the second child, and when that one is found, extend the first hand a little at a time, as they have recommended, and when you find the second one, carefully extract it a little by little, rectally, so that the mother does not feel any pain.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is easier to move the head in the right and left directions.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And adjust it according to the amount of attraction, so that she obeys and escapes from adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is stretched, we have already recommended the cure for strangulation and medication of the womb.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if you do not forget all the causes that they have recommended, keep in mind that what is inside the woman's mouth lies in the man's hand, and apply cisterns and terafarmacons; that will cause that to be absorbed by that part within a few days and it will be dissolved and forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it is necessary to vomit, it is the high-pitched sound of the mouth and stomach that is heard, and then the belly is relieved; and at that time, sub-fumiguacios are administered and are convenient for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Many of the ancients used sub-fumigations of niter and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated, the retention of menstrual blood and the second child must be prevented.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It may be for seeing or for hearing.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the end of the small one is placed in the chimney and the end of the large one over the fire, and the sub-fumigations are placed over the fire's breeze.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold onto that entrance until the sub-fumigations have been consumed and another is made.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the cure of the child's non-penetrating anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	If children do not have and their buttocks do not penetrate, which are already small and thin.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	When the midwife comes to the woman who is in labor and says that she is in pain, and if not, then pierce her with the needle, and make sure you do not touch the scarlet snake.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place your hand over that thin cloth on the face and care for that part inside which is sensitive.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear that it may be thin, then stop in the bathroom for a few days, and take it when the child wants to poop.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if you have thinning of the buttocks for the consolidation of plague or abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is firmly fixed, and take care of it as we have said in the treatment and the dressing.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that come out.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that come out in the part where you leave pus are lower in nodacity and larger, those that come out from the buttocks or in the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And is a fistula or mouths.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodacity is old and comes from the moisture of the white or subtle humidity, and some are seen in these fistulas some penetrants.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	When these penetrating humors are expelled through the urine and excretions; and some women use the remedy of expulsion, and it is most effective for those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas are visible in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the meat of the urethra; and some are visible in the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the buttock.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And why this penetrating fistula is found in the buttock and non-penetrating is that you insert the thin thread into the buttock, and try to gently touch or hammer on the fistula when it is not turbulent.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is turbulence in that area, then try to gently touch or hammer on the fistula when you feel the thread or the horsehair in the thin thread.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that fistula at all or do not proceed with any cause of evacuation, know that it is non-penetrating, and lay the patient on the couch for treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the thigh, its meaning is the excretion of urine from that place and the prohibition of that place being used in medicine for further treatment.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	When something penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and envelope of pain in the circuit, it is necessary to go inside if there is no resistance in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that it will not be closed at any time; and that it does not work in that medication, nor is consolidated as expected.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that do not reach the cure of all, and the cure of those is worked by the hands of the skilled surgeons over which it is placed.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And in that which is not penetrated and not old, the cure of iron is hoped for, as you have recommended to you, and that you already have and profit.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the thigh is placed between your thighs over the shoulder of the patient, and the legs are inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and the hand attempts to plumb or enter if there is resistance in the fistula, when you know the location where the hand penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that leg is around the knee, you cover that you enter the pointed cautery in the knee.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you feel that the mentioned part has already been discovered and penetrated, another thing you will feel is that it is penetrating; and then do not worry about that, as it is not in this remedy, just as they have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	This appears to be a sentence from a medieval medical treatise discussing the health of a man named Alcuin. The translation could be: "However, they used to say that a healthy man's body was in
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	This sentence seems to be discussing the use of cauterization for medical treatment. The translation could be: "However, it is believed that a healthy man's body is in good health if you ignite a small cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert it into the fistula after the wound has healed around the surrounding area; and repeat this process approximately three times when you know that all those adjusted fistulae are as stiff as a quill of feather.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	This sentence appears to be discussing the treatment of swelling in limbs. The translation could be: "However, it is believed that this swelling can be reduced by applying pressure on the border of the affected area, and by treating the affected muscles and consolidating them, and if cured, it is well; but if not, the person will not be cured in a short time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	This sentence seems to be discussing the removal of a foreign object from the body. The translation could be: "However, if it is attempted and does not penetrate into the said part, and enters between that and the foreign object which is made of flesh or bone, and sometimes the fistula in water that seeps through the surface of the skin, you should dry the skin around the beginning of the fistula, and if the object is seen to be in the fistula, and it pervades to the location where the end of the object reaches, and for the object it is freed and catches.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	When you have cleaned and dried those fistulous wounds that are gathered together like the holes of a canula of pain and do not show any cause for them, then proceed as follows:
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If the flux comes several times between you and your operation when you open those wounds, then use the instrument that is best suited to cauterize the pus, which can be a foc or a medical acute instrument. The foc should be adjusted with good habits: so it is attached to those adjusted wounds, and the abscission of the excess humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And cure that which is covered with clothes or has been torn inside that place, and then cure the plague by making hard flesh grow and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines in which are stipticated and excised; when you have restored them, they are healed and you do not fear re-treatment.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has gone through the heel of the buttock and is extended to the surface of the skin, then enter the liquid that is said in the buttock and investigate what it is.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If you try to touch her and enter through the flesh or skin, and it is directed towards the penetration, then do not operate on her unless after second chance and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize that area as has been said; or to make a section in that entrance that allows the conviction of the limb by which you can easily enter those and the subsequent cure; and do not process so that it does not cut through the lasso contained in the wound, and that occurred over the male member's exit; and apply that as they have said for forty years that this will heal; or to stretch that glove and spread that pus that you cut through that entrance as has been said, or to try or another sharp-tipped instrument, and stretch those fistulae that are in the cut so that you can perforate it later; and force you to restore the entire plague by cutting, and if the pus does not solidify, and rupture the open wound in the buttocks, and it will pus through the male member.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And for any fistula, this method is used: when you enter the probe into the fistula, and around the circumference of the buttocks at the surface of the skin and on the margin of the buttocks, hold the probe for perforation, which is like a needle for preparing the flesh according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	When entering the abdominal cavity through one of the incisions or around it, and then attempting to enter the fistula through that opening to achieve the concavity of the belly.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If you penetrate the side of the buttock as far as possible, then remove the intestine from that area where you inserted the catheter; and remove the end of the intestine and adjust the two ends according to each other, and stitch them, and leave it for a day or two, and when you insert the catheter into the flesh, stitch it in the area where the flesh is pierced, which are the two ends of the intestine and those that are inserted.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound when it is solidified and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then make it penetrate using any method you are prepared for, except that it must be done quickly so that the catheter does not enter; and when it is healed, make another opening in the area where the catheter was inserted.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spatulum spinos is what is used to close the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, because that is not necessary, so it is used as many times as possible.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the sutures of hematomas in which blood runs into the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhydas are made of two hands, either between the thighs as if they were made of charcoal, or those are made of something similar to fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those are small and large, and that the blood comes from those places and is one, and the movements, and the outside of the thighs, and at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are the outside of the thighs are made from the months of little humidity, of which the blood runs clear or a small amount of sweat is continuous, and it is according to the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is cutting the thigh is that you command to the patient that he rests and that he expresses it when the thigh is not hurting and the hemorrhages appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	When you have finished and placed your hand under the patient's thighs, and then raise those parts that you hold in your hands.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the points are not held in place by humidity or softness of the parts, then take hold of them with your fingers, thumb, or nail, and remove them from the wounds, and place them on the edges of the wounds, and cover them with some powdered dust that is placed at the end of cauterization, so that they remain in place; or cauterize them after the capillary cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And cure those parts in the other treatment when they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not comply with evacuation, then close it with a cord that is applied to the anus in such a way that it complies with evacuation, and wash it with water that is in the bucket and that complies with evacuation more easily when the anus is emptied.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	And if the hemorrhoids are due to the anus, then the cause is leucocytes, and it is because you take hold of those parts with your hand or nail, or take hold of those parts with your points, and place them, and cure those parts in water that has been told to be healed when they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	When the patient has been sewn up, carefully administer sutures with your second hand: hold the needle firmly and insert it into the hole and extract the threads from the parts above, and make it pierce through the hole in the other part and enclose the threads that were extramitated in the part behind the hole, and stretch them latitudinally; and stretch the thread with great force and pull out the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all, and leave one untouched and do not cut the other, so that the excess of the sanctuary does not run from that.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place your hand over the buttock and press it with red oil or ointment; and place that on the chest and order the patient to stop.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave that inside the cage; and when it is healed, treat those as soon as they are sick or as soon as they become healthy again.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of curing fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Watery discharges occur due to the excess of the fistula or due to the constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	When those ancient remedies are not effective in that medicine, you should know that you are using the point of a needle or the tip of your own nail to pierce those humid areas and those that are hostile to those, which are the scars that have been made; and then care for them after they have been consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	If you must use your hands to make those points, do so with great caution when they are inside and have not been shaved; and then care for them after they have been healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	In the care of wounds, this is closed.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that salving is closed, and it is not done unless the color of the body resembles that of a clavicle, and it is used throughout the body, especially in the feet and toes, and for that pain you must attend to the animal.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then you should know that it is inserted in this way that it is in the circuit of the clasp, and it is held by the forfices or by one, and it is eradicated from its root; and you should care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you wish, make a point on the next one that was previously mentioned in the upper part.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Many cases of warts are small, rough, round, and under the surface of the skin, and they spread to more children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The cure for the wart is that it expands and becomes inserted, or that it presses on that part with a knife or a needle that goes inside.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you wish, make a point according to what has been said, either with a focus or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And if the warts have already been removed and not removed, it is with the instrument that you say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Many cases of veruca are small, round, and under the surface of the skin, and they spread to more children. When the wart becomes rough and resembles the bite of a ant, and it is made around the area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for the wart is that you take a needle of bone or of bone of a volt, and it is strong, and place it over the ant within which it contains the circle of the needle of the parts of the wart; and rotate your hand am the needle inside that it becomes inserted in the circuit of the ant, and place it on the skin of the flesh, and remove the ant from its nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you want, make a canula of copper or iron in this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Shall the beginning of the canula be hollowed out, closed (not perforated), wrapped around it, so that over the same the learning of it is blunted and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant with the one that is given in the cauterization of a thread on the top of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of instruments that are administered to give cristers.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some vaginas are made of silver or lead or melted or hammered; and some vaginas are made of those instruments small and large according to those that are administered, for the administration of that which is administered in the care of small children is small; and of those of which the ends are rough or roughened, the cristers of those are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few cristers:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the canula of the one in which the bag is fastened is wide according to this manner; and at that difference, the bag is fastened there as many times as it is.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	When the end of the patient's penis is inserted into the anus, it should be done gently, like a lion entering its den; and in one of the testicles there are two ducts, and on the other side one duct, and the width of the duct increases according to the thickness of the veins and becomes large at the end.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	If the bag in which the medicines for the bladder of a beast or the wool of a sheep are placed is narrow, and the width of the penis is a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	If it is perforated by many ducts that rotate around it; and if the largest part of the said space is entered by the greatest number of ducts.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	If you insert your hand into those ducts as far as they are possible, and adjust the bag accordingly; and when you place it on that penis, make sure the bag is placed at the head of the testicles between two distinct points, and for each duct, place the bag on one side: how much quality of cristerizing you do on that penis depends on the tolerance of the patient's thighs; and remember not to be too long or too short.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	When the patient's body is lying on their back, and their limbs are raised to their chest, and a pillow is placed under their head, or a cushion; and after the cauterization of the wound with olive oil, or with almond oil, or with muclegregor or with the like; and then it is introduced into the belly with ease, and the midwife takes the bag and expresses the amniotic fluid more and more as it is emptied into the bowl, and then it is removed from the bowl and the patient's limbs are returned to their original position.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine fails to improve it, hold onto it as much as possible; and if you sleep on it for a whole night, it will not improve.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you perform the cure on the patient's abdominal pains and the swelling of the limbs, then you will have to repeat the cauterization until it is cured.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If in the belly there are hemorrhages or abscesses, then you must be a very skilled and gentle midwife, among the midwives those whose children are born healthy.
De curacio de las plaguas.	This phrase translates to "Of the cure of the plagues." In the context of medieval medical
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	This sentence is a bit complex and may require some context to fully understand. However, a rough translation could be: "I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues that this is suitable for free use, and I will say again that the cure of these and other medicines follows the complement." In other words, the cure for these diseases and others should follow a certain set of rules or guidelines.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	This sentence translates to "Therefore, say that the diseases are divided according to what they are and according to the location over which they appear." In other words, diseases can be categorized based on their nature and the part of the body where they manifest.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	This sentence is quite complex and may require some context to fully understand. However, a rough translation could be: "And the causes that make you have diseases are such as crystallization of uric acid, or incision of the skin or of the chest, or percussion, or puncture, or suturing, or semblance to those of the causes of diseases." In other words, the causes of diseases can be categorized based on various factors such as crystallization of uric acid, incision of the skin or chest, percussion, puncture, suturing, and resemblance to other causes of diseases.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	This sentence translates to "The most common diseases that are found in the body are such as plague on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the stomach, and resemblance to those of the limbs." In other words, the most common diseases found in the body include plague on various parts such as the head, neck, chest, stomach, and limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	When you are recommending the cure for some diseases by pausing that reasoning and rule over other diseases.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you begin with the simple headaches, where the remberance of the compositions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, when an simple headache occurs and there is no fracture, you should consider: if it is due to stone or appearance, and the neck has already been divided justly and is a great pain and fears about that malady having come from apoplexy causation, then you should cut the skull and flesh the head as much as possible, and do not delay; and extract what is necessary from the second part of the skull according to the amount of virtue of the brain if there is no other cause that prohibits fleshing, especially if it is coming from the disease that is causing the headache.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if the fleshing is on the opposite side of the affected part; and keep the malady of repletion and of vomiting and of heavy viscera.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If during the fasting any cause is prohibited, then you should be less hungry and not approach meat or fat.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And rest over the wound, if it occurs with apthaea cauterization, let the blood flow into an olive-colored spot or into the vein that is being treated.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure of apthaea cauterization, rest over the wound, if it has recently been cleaned and the air has not changed the powder that you recommend to apply a little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, rest over the affected area until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or due to injury and not properly adjusted lips, adjust those sutures according to the recommendation of the sutures you recommend.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has already been exposed to the bone and does not retain it but only a small suspensory, you may incise that and apply the appropriate treatment for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place of the knee, and command the thigh that is cut from the veins where the flesh grows: caps and form coats and semblances like them, within which it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If decay has settled in the rotten code and does not adhere to the bone, then you must inscribe this entire poultice with this and apply it, and take care of it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If these plagues are arteries or veins that can cause pain to the patient, and doctors have not removed them, then you must inquire about the artery, and if it is not inscribed, then you must inscribe it with a spatula; and if this causes the patient discomfort, then you must cauterize it within the artery.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, the cause of them is leucorrhea; it is said that you should powder over those this powder, which has become compacted, to prevent the air from moving those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the recipe for the powder is as follows: olive oil of one part, dragon's blood of three parts, and no-extinguished parts in equal parts; all are mixed and crushed, and the plague is filled with it, and it is firmly held together by good construction over that which adheres to it, and it is coagulated on the sanc.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply pressure to that spot with powder and rub it in, and do not slide it while it is still wet, so as not to waste the medicine until the patient is cured.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And if any veterinarian uses this alone cauterization, when they are not here and cannot give you a dragon's sinew.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is already performed on the largest pains when it is possible to place it over them and they are straight, and the recent pains of the same person, where the air has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has been altered, and especially during summer, you will not see this powder in its position as it cures those who have said, whether you place your hand over those nests found more distantly, or whether you place your hand over those parts of the dough of the other water and honey that has been mixed; and this cures those in another cure when they are cured.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If you happen to have a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you can remove this with your hands.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	When I describe the treatment for fractures of the head, it is called gout by doctors.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the ills of the colon.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the disease occurs in the colon, there is no difference in treatment, and between the gout of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the colon have been cut or the artery, then if it is the nerve, it is not in its place but rather it is avoided surgery as much as possible that causes violent spasms, as it is similar to the windpipe and semblance of the lungs that are not in the nerves and contract in that way.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not press on the cause of all leakage, which is the substance of the nerves is leaking and the continuation of it is in the brain, which is pushed out from all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is treated with unnatural medicines, then as the water is washed away, some infused olive oil or not-infused, and when the water is washed away and the other peels are minced according to this manner, and they find moisture.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	When the plague is large, administer sutures or dress the lips of the patient, and apply care to that part when it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	When the plague is deep or occurs in the lower part of the wound, you should perforate it in a less painful place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	When the plague has already been inscribed on an artery and a flux of blood is produced, you should separate or dry that part, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	When the plague has already inscribed the spines of the gallbladder or all, and the veins of the collar are saved, you should adjust the lips of the abdomen with sutures over the gallbladder head and do not touch that; apply equal pressure to that and reduce it over its natural figure, and stretch it gently, and leave it there for a while; and apply care to that part when it is sterilized and excited in the areas where it is inflamed and swollen.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	When the plague has already inscribed the bones and causes pain, you should percuss that part, and if in it there are fragments of bones, extract all that you can from them; and what is not visible to you, leave it within the plague when it subsides, and separate it and the edge of the bone is alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	If the plague is recent, you should powder that powder which has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If in the plague there is a fistula, you should cure that part with that which has been recommended to you, as the reminder will come appropriately in the head of the capital.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the plagues of the colon or resemblance, if it is found between the scales and it is made with sponge or cotton or lanolin or similar, you can use it.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is percussion of sponge or cotton, and sometimes of the depth, you should consider if the plague has entered the mouth when the thigh is opened; you know that the plague is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in it there is not depth and the plague is recent to the head of the sanc, you should pause in it of the first powder of the morning, and do not stress that it is not the sac retained in the depth of it and that returns to the heart and that does not attract the mouth, more pause in it you find attractive, and desire that those days have passed.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the remedy is not at your disposal, you must pause in the orifice of the plague cot to prevent this from happening because of too much moisture; and make the patient lie down over the plague so that it runs out of this adjusted one.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the plague has already passed for three days or more and there is no spasm, trembling of the heart, or stricture of the throat, and sometimes other good dispositions of the patient, you know that the plague is safe; and then cure that joint pain and the other curative treatment as soon as it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the cure of the patient is postponed and it takes a long time to be opened, you know that a fistula has already been made; then cure that joint pain for the benefit of the head.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the plague is due to compression of the abdomen or chest, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or belly, you cure that joint pain by sewing it if it is large, or by powdering it if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If joint pain has already been made in the bones and there are already pus-filled cavities, you must tighten the plague and extract those puss from it if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, you should wash the parts that get wet with pus, as the extraction of them is difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	When other diseases occur in the other members, the treatment for this is the treatment of that which has been called.
De las plaguas del ventre.	When the diseases of the stomach.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, or small, or bitter.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	When some of the veins or nerves of the intestine or hernia are caused by certain things, it is necessary to make an insertion of them and a suture of them to be firm and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small dislocation is difficult to do with another hand, and if it is not easy to reduce them, then do not make the insertion of them into their place so soon, because they will be squeezed and become engorged so that the insertion of them is difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And the better dislocation is small, because in that it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the special cases mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you know that the suture of the stomach is second to four hands, and less common sutures are those that are used in the sutures of other diseases of the chest.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	When two of these own stitches communicate with other afflictions, but not their own in the abdominal stitching.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you every examination and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the affliction is small and occurs due to any cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then you are in one of two hands: either because of the slight rupture as they have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when it is inflamed, you should know that you should cover that with a cloth that you have submerged in warm water alone, or that you have dipped in warm water, vinegar, and cyperus, and spicery, and essential oils, and you should apply it to the belly until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some people have seen that this has steeped in water, and it is better than the water alone to resolve the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation being resolved, you should moisten the intestine with water in which it was soaked in aloe and mallows, for then the intestine is allayed by little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If the intestine of the patient is tightly closed in this treatment, then you should divide the disruption with a small sharp instrument that has not yet been used on injured tissue.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first line of the translation is: "The primary treatment is better when it is not cut and does not cause any loss.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	When it comes to the instrument, its shape is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp edge, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is delicate, and it should not be rough like the sharpness of a needle, but rather it should be hard at its tip.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	When the plague spreads and comes out of the belly, then you should know that its reduction should be in the form of the natural shape of the organ, in the appropriate place, if possible, over there, it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should know that you should lay the patient on their stomach and stop the changes that are not suitable for the belly; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should stop the head of the patient and put the chest in a position that is not suitable for the parts that have been done.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if it seems that the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should stop your attention and your consideration for a moment to see which part has the plague so that the other part is not affected.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And it is important that you administer this in the large and small plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in the small plagues, stop that which is in your preparation and apply that which is between your most thin layers, which holds the disruption completely with its own means and adjusts the lips of the patient, and remove from there to there that which causes another wound.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suture method: one that grasps the gauze, according to the number of times it fits around the wound; and then releases it at the end of the disruption of that ring, and pulls the gauze one way, or another that you do not insert your fingers into the ends of the chain, but into the ends of the cipher that leaves the chain of parts, when it penetrates from that part; and you have already added the ends of the chain and the ends of the cipher, and then make four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tighten the double thread in the circuit of the gauze, and some eyes of parts are seen, and add a few more lips and plaques for addition; and release the size of that and put another gauze on it as if it was the first one; and do not stop doing this until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the threads are finer between the cloth and subtlety, four of the subtle ones make small incisions in the flesh; and the large ones are difficult to insert into the chain, and therefore it is necessary that they be fine in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	It is not necessary for the needle to be placed at the extremities of the first rib, because if the flesh is not scarred firmly and the abscess oozes before its consolidation, it will cause pain.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	The wounds should not be prolonged with stitches so that the abscess is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	If the needles are firmly fixed on their ends so that the patient does not feel pain, and you place your hand over the expanded pulvis on all parts, holding the ends of the needles; and when you leave them after knowing that the abscess is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of sutures are suitable for needles in the hands of the patient, which are enough in the suture of their needles or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is as follows: and it is that you administer through the suture to the four ends of the rib, the two ends of the cuff, in a line, with an needle in which there is a fine engagement in subtlety and size.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle of that metal piece from which you began, so that the true vagina of the subcutaneous part can be closed again, so that the suture is one stitch away from the drape that the cloth you used was sewn with.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the amount of the large of the said needle.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is good for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And if this stitch is used to close the wound that was injured in a man's belly, which had been infected with an abscess, and was the rupture of the abscess of a palm, and was inflamed around two palms of the intestine, and was the disruption of the intestine; and then you reduce that depressed part that the intestine had been for the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and was cared for that and was healed; and afterwards it was purified for many years, and was converted to its own conditions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	When the other doctors had failed to heal the patient; and by miracle, this one who could not cure that ailment, which was located in the place where there was no wound or any medicine, but rather, it was due to the plague of two vaginas that day and constant urination, which was cured by fire.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	May you be able to describe two types of suture in the next narrative of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And is that you understand that the suture of the abdomen, and then insert an awl from the defective part to the intact part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, when the awl penetrates into the abdomen and through all the muscles, and leave the end of the cipher in the place where you have inserted the awl; and then let the other end of the awl from the defective part to the intact part in the other end of the glove.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And if you have managed to make that penetrate, then you will make another penetration in the other end of the glove of the defective part to the intact part; and leave the extremity of the cipher that is in this hole, and let the awl penetrate the awl in the other end of the defective part to the intact part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	When you insert your hand into the vagina, it should be done in a way that allows you to reach the cervix at the end of the vagina, which is located in the part of the body where the penis enters.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then, continue along this side and extract the bullet from the socket, and return it to its original position in the socket, and extract the end of the penis that is on the other side of this extraction; and extract the entire bullet from the socket.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Then make another incision and another, and make another incision in the same way that you cut everything according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this suturing is that you cut the epidermis, which cuts the hair, in such a way that you cut the vagina with one incision at the end of the socket, and it leaves the other incision inside when the vulva is closed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of suture is the one that Gualia recommends, and this is for the patient to follow according to their doctor's advice, as you should cut that part according to what the doctors cut, in such a way that you add all parts to the corresponding part of its natural form; and apply the ends of one side and the end of the penis to the other end of the body, and it is then followed as recommended by me.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have placed the needle at the end of the incision on your own hand, and made it penetrate into the wound in that direction, and seen two ends of the cipher; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the opening into the wound through two ends of the cipher.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those points, and make them penetrate into the wound from the opening through two ends of the incision that are opposite to the one you have just made in the opposite direction.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this suture is better than the common suture, and is the one that was previously remembered.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the saying of Guillaume.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And maybe they tell you that the abdominal suture is corrected by two needles, so that you enter through each one with a needle, and then start with the needle that you must use, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those that close the belly.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you know that when there is a rupture in the lower part of the abdomen, it is difficult to perform the suture compared to other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of medical treatment for plague is made by the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you manage to capture the recent plague in the presence of the sacred denouncement that the air has altered there, and reduce the intestine and bowels there, and are suitable for that decently, then place your hand over that enchanted powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has already altered the plague, then place your hand over that alchemy which contains those which you have in presence at the time when they produce hard pebbles and crush the fields, and are solid and clear; and take care of that plague as the cure of other plagues is when it is healthy.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the presence of medicines, then place your hand over that potion which begins to get wet, and comb your hair, change your clothes, and permute those two veins in the day, as you have and teach, when the plague is healthy, so that you do not prescribe another medicine in positioned ways when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague spreads to the main members, then cover that lion's wool with watered olive oil of quality or rose oil, and place it in the circuit of the loci which are between the angles and further the asses' legs.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If you feel pain or putrefaction in the testicles, four ways are usually used to apply it, which is to cristerize that black stiptic with four views, and especially if the prostate is perforated and an exit penetrates into the cavity of the conquavitat.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	You know that that which is from the testicle is of less medicinal value than that which is in the subtle testicles.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	It is of difficult cure that the testicle which is called "gundu" does not receive plague from the vessels which are in it; and this is because of the great number of veins which are there, and because of the size of the testicle, and because of its subtlety, and because it is near to the nature of the nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If this is what you do from the plague, and the result is that you reduce the opening of the mouth, then return to your own rule, and reduce those testicles that are enguant.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed through that space and you have already done good or black, then you who strengthen that which is near to the place that is denigrated of it, by so that comes flows of sanc, four in the tela are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	When you have inserted the other limb into the opening, pause the two extremities of the gouty foot at the end of the plague forum, so that above your hand, the attraction of the gout may cause the cloth to tighten and expel the pus from the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remember the plagues that occurred when they entered the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be repaired in some people, because I have seen that which was once infected with the plague in the stomach by percussion of a hand and was the plague of the left part of the stomach, and the plague was an old one and made a fistula, and it was treated and ventilated.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	And if you have completed the cure of the patient, even if it was not convinced in the care of the physician, I stopped subtleizing that which healed and the location is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you think that the location is already consolidated, time over the thighs where you will go over the accident of the stomach; and do not encounter anyone for that accident and ram into the mouth of his dispossessed possessions eating and drinking, and then return to the bath and exercise in your speech.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	When the patient suffers from diarrhea and it is small, it is customary to apply this remedy: and that you take large goblets; and accordingly adjust the lips of the diarrhea and stop one goblet of those that are in the lips of the diarrhea; therefore, when you over the lips and tighten your mouth, you will split the goblet of the patient, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then stop another fly near the first one, and do not stop making flies until you have made as many as the quantity of the diarrhea.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce that and see how the diarrhea reduces; and apply those caps to the belly after it has been made healthy, and do not cause any harm to the thighs.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the intestine is visible due to a small substance that is made from the intestines of animals, which is more like a needle; and that you take the extremity of these intestinal threads, and it is not dirty, and place it at the extremity of the hole in the flesh, envelop it, and enter it into the needles and into the flesh of the intestine, and reduce it in disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This maneuver of stitching is not only second in faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the plague is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the intestines, then no matter how skilled you are, you will not be able to treat it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of cure for a zuchem and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that all plague and aphthae when they are suppressed and in the ancient times, and an ulcer is made, and it does not get consolidated and gets bigger over time and does not abscess, everybody calls it a fistula and we call it that ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And if fistula is secondarily formed, hard, white, and not painful, but of the same shape as the wound of labor; and for that reason it is called that abscess, which is pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in the abscess of moist flesh, it gets bigger; and very soon the moisture is abscessed in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some people have noticed this moisture, it is few, it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	When the division is opened, the plagues are named according to the wounds that are not healed or do not heal in the bare flesh, and there are only four causes for them: one is due to a lack of sanation in the cos; another is due to maliciousness in the patient; or it is between the patient and the labia that there is hard flesh which nature does not allow to be born; or it is due to motile lesions; or the wound itself is infested with matter and the material that is at the patient's tramesa is of poor quality; or the medicine is inappropriate for the cure of the patient; or when corruption spreads in the region and it is a pestilence; or due to the property of the region as in Saragossa, where it is difficult to digest the maladies and is delayed in the apostema sanacio due to nature; or there is one, or multiple bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, and the remedies for them are in the hands of doctors in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And how do you know the cure for fistula which is caused by operation in the division?
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	When you know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; four of those are fistulas that reach the veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the bladder, or the vesica, or to any of the costae, or to any of the spinal columns of the two, or to any of the joints composed of the asy and foot; and those that give proximity to the main member and resemblances.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And for this type of fistula that is followed by this manual, it is one of the difficulties in the treatment of maladies, and does not receive care, and there is an occupation that is unpleasant and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas that does not reach the depths of those places that I mentioned, and you hope and trust in the cure of the disease, and you want to reach knowledge of the disease, then try with iron or steel, and if the fistula follows correctly, and ask for that which is good for it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that which is good for it by trying to draw a subtle thread, for the thread of the living heart is lifted and curved because of the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula has many horrible features, it is not possible for you to understand what I mean about this attempt.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Since Christ was crucified by his own crucifixion, the water through which he was nailed must have been used for the other crucifixions as well.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	If you inquire particularly, it is possible that you can determine if you have bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the long or short fistula is the one with the horrible features, or if it is a fistula with horrible features that is over all of your strength, all of your entombment, which entombs the thighs, and the cure of the pain depends on the compression of the hand over the location, and resemblances to the significance and causes of accidents in the amputation.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	If you have been aware of all those causes, you will see the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent adjacent fistula or in the location, long in joint, or far from the joint, or from nerves, or from artery, or from vein, or from one of the places which you have and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you wet the fistula according to what is said about the narcotic of the patient, and let it be known that it is in that filtration and of rotten carns, and that it was born in the slaughterhouse of the carn, or of the thigh and of the semblance, and care for that entrance which is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and follows the rectum, you should cover it as deeply as possible in the pre-anus, and modify all of its rotten carns; and administer envelopes filled with acute medicines, and introduce them into the fistula's cavity, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And use some sharp ones for those who are in the cavity of the fistula, which the acute medicine has corrupted completely that is inside the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And restore those as soon as possible which bring healthy carns inside when it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize that according to what has been recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is known and you must certify this, then you should inquire about it and dry that second part which has been recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or primary member as they have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is discovered and found to be corrupted and blackened, then you should remove that part where the corruption is located; and then care for that part with this remedy that it may become healthy again.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healthy and mobile as it should be, you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you discover another way and carefully make the reason of it and its mutilation in the same place with the fortalasa tieua, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it becomes healthy, then so be it; and if not, you know that that corruption is in the deep depths of the heart, which has not been able to, and therefore for you there is no other remedy than to have that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bones become corrupted, or they are as small as possible, then you should remove that part with your best effort using forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if those bones are very small, then you should carefully make the extraction of all of them, and those do not have any cause for distress in your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If you have any opposition to any cause of the cold humors, and if there is no fear or mistake in their inscription, then you should inscribe those lines or bones where they are, and remove the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you are not prepared to remove the bones of your hour, then stop over the plaque that is irrigating the plaque of that bone and carne and limb, and let the plaque be unsolidified and reinforced in the section you have inscribed in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear, stop over the cotton submerged in hot oil, or the Egyptian anguent, or in the belly of the green enguents, when they have been separated from those lines, and the bones are separated from the ablation, and the atraccio is alleued.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If you have a great bone that is like the bone of camba or ham and thigh, and that part of it is corrupted by the face of it, then you should cut that am only behind that negress and corruption, and proportionately restore the plaque.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the body of the bone is corrupted to a great extent, and the corruption has reached the medullary cavity of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entire opening into the location where the corruption has pervaded, and you treat that within which it has become solid.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	I advise you to go to a man in his thighs so that you can pause there and have an assistant to help with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of approximately xxx years old suffered pain in his thigh, and there were many bad parts on the material of the body that had been pervaded by the matter of the body through the thigh, and it was matter of gout, not from an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then extend the time because of the error of the doctors who had placed the gout in the thigh, and the materials were corrupted, and the cure was delayed until the hole was closed, and there were many things in that part that got perforated and the humidity of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	When the care of many doctors surrounded him for several years, and he did not know about it in his art, then you were called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	When I saw the wound of the patient and the materials that came out of it through those great wounds; and all of that man's body was completely swollen and his color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then I inserted the needle into one of those wounds and it reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I examined all of the wounds and found that they had reached every part of the wound.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Then I wrapped the wound and inserted something over it, and I saw a piece of bone inside the wound, which was rotten, terrible, and corrupted; and a part of the wound had already become corrupted when it had penetrated into the flesh.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I realized that this was discovered and prepared by the bone discovered.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you knew that it was not in the bone but in that corruption that had been absorbed and hidden, and you had already fallen.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then you paused the restoration of the plague with conservative medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	When you have thoroughly examined the bone and discovered the first sign of corruption on the bone, continue to examine the rest of the bones.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will inform you of what appears to be the corruption of that bone, and then perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discovered another vein and did not stop engraving the bones particularly and performing the restoration of the bone, but it was not restored until I cut around a palm of the bone, and that extracted from the marrow of the bone, and then restored it with medications, and it became slightly solid and healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to repeat the operation and sectioning of the bone except for the disposition of the bladder and the lack of tolerance of the bladder and the kidney, where the accident occurred in all hours due to excessive evacuation without proper sinusoidal drainage.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And it is healed by the whole cure, and there is nothing hard in the bones; and it is good for the disposition of the body in the healthy limbs and returns the virtue of the body; and it is discussed in their dispositions and no harm is done in ambulation nor damage in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If you find pain in the chest, then follow this hand: and take hold of the limb and stretch it at its end, and command that it extends over the first limb; and cut off the limb of that lana pus gross than the first limb; and place that limb on the flesh that is left of the chest, and extend the extension of it so that it pulls the flesh to the parts left, and you will discover the flesh over the location that you want to squeeze so that it does not squeeze the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And pause for a while the table of the feet, so that when you do this it is not forbidden to cut that does not cut the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And make sure that the cutting is over the location of the corrupt little by little, so that if it is in the concavity of the corrupt bone and does not appear at its appearance in the feeling, and force the cutting of the other watched.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bones are corrupt and not painful, then advance one part continuous at another, and the corruption is in the end or in the first part, then you will discover all the flesh of all parts; and pause for a while here, and cut that of the first part where the corruption is when it is continued the cutting of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	If the swelling is located in the area of corruption, then a small piece should be taken, as they have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If corruption is in the joint, insert into that corrupt joint, and set the bones that continue from another part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If of the corruption is in the continuance of many joints, you are not in this reason but engaged.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If corruption is in the breast of the man or foot, it is very difficult; but cover that you ask for the corruption in what manner appears to you, and open that, and order it after each other according to your ability, and may this be possible, and if not, contrary to your will, blood or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	You know what are inscisions and the bars to insert into those bones are most according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and minuteness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you prepare for all kinds of operation instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	You know that this operation means to you over the species of the instrument you request; when you have great study and long experience in the hands of this art, and testimony of hands of diseases, where the hands already you have made those which are convenient for you in all parts of the disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	When you are forming the end of this capital, the number of the instruments that you will use as simply as possible according to those that you will process in your prohibited practice, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	The shape of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part
Forma de autra serra:	1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part
Forma de autra serra gran:	1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the
Forma de ray:	1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	1. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	When it does not seem fitting otherwise, it is necessary that the corners of the joints be sharpened when they are corroded, or if the mouth is very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of razor's edge of others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of razor's edge of smaller size:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of razor's edge in Latin:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The form of the other razor's edge should be such that it is sharp like the point of a sword and the member of the body is gently cut, making it less harsh.
Forma de lu:	Form of "it":
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of razor's edge in which it has concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of razor's edge that is another subtle one:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor's edge with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of razor's edge that resembles a tent:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of incisors that cut the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a blade and its end is sharp, and it is displayed in certain parts of the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	This is a description of the shape of a bone that corresponds to the size of the hole in it.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	When the end of the body is triangular and sharp-pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and apparently all the causes that have been said of razors and scissors and bars are.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the cutting edge and the compression of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The ends can be smeared either by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the medicine does not cure, sometimes the corruption leaves the member that does not suffer from any cause, it seems that you have made the member enter this way to the hon of the corruption, so that the evacuation of the evacuation of the body is for the death or malice that is the greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which happens is that the member is made black inside because it is what that burns, or it can be covered with the blackness inside that pierces that part of the body which seeks to hold all the corpse and take the whole body; and then you have an inscription on that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	When it seems that the cause of the corruption is due to the percussion of certain venomous causes, such as that of the scorpion's sting or of a poisonous plant or of a similar one, then...
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the corruption or the percussion is at the end of the digit, then you should insert the digit and do not give space for the corruption to enter the womb.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If it seems that you have reached the womb, then you should insert the digit into the root of the finger and do not give space for the corruption to enter that holds in the thumb of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	If you are unable to reach it, then insert the arm inside the thigh at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If another corruption passes and the tail is sometimes outside the thigh, then in that is the death of the patient; and it is necessary to administer another cause or another in quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	When it seems that the corruption is at the foot of the foot, then you should insert it into one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you hold on to the heel of the foot, then you should insert the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it may enter the dressing, you should insert the candle into the hole within the joint of the dressing.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If corruption has already spread over the dressing, you should not engage in it but dismiss it, and leave the body to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The way to insert the member or tie it is that you stretch the limb over the part where you want to insert it, and stretch another limb over its place; extend the minister one limb to the parts that are left, and extend another limb in theirs; then separate the flesh that is between two limbs by cutting it in half lengthwise if it is discovered entirely, and stitch or tie it.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And make sure that there is a piece of cloth from all parts that do not touch the place, and that it comes to the body with the adjusted wound and sew it.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If you happen to spill blood when working, you should cauterize the wound area or place it on some powders that tighten the blood; and return to your medication when it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When treating the affected member with the appropriate tool, and care to enter it until it is healthy.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you to go to a man in the city who has had this accident, which you and I have recommended, which is similar to the black one in the city that was burned due to a fire that was set.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurs in the city's entrance when you try to hold it all in.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares for himself the tools he needs to enter the curacy into the member with great force and vehemence, and immediately that part of the body enters the joint, and it becomes healthy.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, this corruption has occurred in the city's indicated member.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I win, and my perforated reflection returns to the excess that I had over the world of the body, the mundification of the face; and it is not reflected in the excess and begins to enter another part that begins in the face.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the appetite makes me insert my hand into the member of the body, and you do not want to expect over there about the reflection of that excess, and more than you fear, you must insert your hand into the death of the body, where the virtue of the city was over carnality.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	It seems that the text is describing a medical procedure or treatment. Here's my attempt at translating the first source sentence:
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	When I have not told this story for anything other than that it is an assistant over this matter and that it has a meaning for what is meant and secondly for what is done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the treatment of the spine and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When gout occurs in the fleshy parts of the body and the area of the gout is prolonged because it collects filth, and it breaks and pierces, and the sickness is excreted, and the location is considered as if it were empty, and the cord that is removed from it is like fine linen, and no corruption is found in the bone or nerve or tendon, it is called a sinus, and no fistula is formed.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged because corruption presses on some member, it is called a fistula and we do not allow it.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of the wound is that it is inserted into that cord as much as it can turn, and mainly when it is made fine and becomes like linen, and comfortable that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the gallbladder adheres and that corruption does not follow due to another cause, and if there is a lot of redness in the gallbladder, then you should treat that with a remedy.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	If you consider the intestine, and if it is large, and the smell of the bile is strong, then you should treat that with an Egyptian remedy made of oil and vinegar that receives parts of ginger and cloves, and they are adjusted in a container, and they are placed over the fire within which that remedy is melted and it reaches a certain temperature.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and treat that remedy to the intestine, strengthen the opening of the gallbladder, and place the medicine in the gallbladder according to the number of hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then take that which is precious and use it for so many days within which the intestine is dissolved and the skin becomes moist.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some remedies are treated with fire, when this medicine is not presented to you; and if you take the coal from the fire, and put water over it, and then close it and treat that remedy inside which you think that intestine has come out.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ashes of smoke, you should list that ash and honey and mix them in equal parts, and list that honey and water mixture, where half of the properties of honey is to cleanse and wash, and it adheres to the sinus, especially when there is excessive dryness and suffocation.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have made gout on some wounds and feel that the sinus has already become inflamed, you should list that honey mixture to make the flesh smoother in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And is that you take the ointment of dead sea water and dissolve that honey in rose oil, or that you list that honey mixture with other ointments and enguents that have the properties which I have already written in the book on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the sinus opening is straight and the canula of the clyster is not received in that direction, you should list that honey mixture little by little, and stop when it is amplified, and wrap it in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside that.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	When the incision seems to be wide, you should add more stitches of the patient's lip and reduce the number of stitches in the quantity that is inside the clitoris.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the incision of the part where the bracelet is placed is elevated towards the parts on either side, you should dry it in the lower place that is in it so that the bracelet does not enter further, because the bracelet is cut in the pregnant cavity of the flesh.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the bone according to your preference, you should perforate that member for preparation according to the one that corresponds to the bracelet less than what you consider and that it is not retained by any cause of the bracelet.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	E apply consolidative medicines that are placed over the sinus according to what you want to extend over the cloth of li.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity as to communicate the entire sinus; and place it in the forfices on the right side of the incision of the sinus with a large piece that is ample enough for the incision of the sinus; and extend over other cloth of li according to the quantity of the piece, and place it over that for the position far from the incision of the sinus so that the eyssiment of the bracelet of lu is not retained by the large cloth for more than a few days with one veguada.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	When one is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains closed throughout the hour because it is adjusted to the bone in that part of the shoulder.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And for what reason do you know if the pain of the bone is from the shoulder or not, or is it digested or not?
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And if you also consider the location of that sinus, whether or not the patient feels pain there, and if it is in the area of the attack.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in that manner, and you see the material that was applied over the orifice of the sinus adheres, or it becomes appropriate to adhere, then you hold the drip in your hand or the next day, and when you remove the drip, you change the cloth and renew the application.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if the sinus has less space and subtle viruses, you will not despair of the adhesion of it, because the treatment of the body is appropriate, because in those homes where generations of flesh are formed in such plagues, and in those where the opposite is done.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the intestine has not adhered to itself for three days and there is no sign of improvement, know that the intestine will not adhere; and if the adhesion of the intestine is delayed and prolonged, then adjust the intestine in exsiccation with medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they become dry like leather when adjusted after the addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	When the most difficult part of the treatment is reached, it is necessary to take out the dead tissue and cut it off in a round shape, and place it on top of the wound, covering it with a layer of fresh earth, and then close it with that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And when it seems to be in that state, if there is no brace, cut off the dead tissue as much as possible, and use that; or if you take mirrors and open them and put them on, and sprinkle some over the mel that is engorged, and strengthen that over the sinu; and put that over the mel that you have cut off, and sprinkle some over the drap and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some prescriptions are administered in long-term aristology and are considered to be of the finest lilies (and lilies are) and flour of erries and centaury, and use those simple or adjusted ones, cut them off and crumble them and sprinkle some over the mel that I recommended, and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinu is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, you know that the corruption is in the preon of the patient, and you make an investigation in the bones or in other hard members or ligaments; then you cure the patient with the curacio fistular, as it is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	When treating a case of fingernails that are worn down and have had the tip of the finger cut off, and then sliced in half, it is necessary to operate on the affected area.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	When the blister or ganglion is removed from the skin of the knee or foot, and it is not found in other places, and it is prolonged and the care is very expensive, or it is punctured with a puncture, or it becomes corrupted, and it breaks within the skin as it corrodes the root of the blister, and it corrupts the entire thing, and it pervades its corruption into the bone that is inserted in the fetid odor, and the end of the said lump is made, and its color becomes black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have that aforementioned remedy that has been said in division and does not satisfy your care, then you must know that you have to insert the iron completely into the superfluity that is rising from the blister and cut off the cauterization at that place, for the cauterization is not suitable for this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is healthy and the blister is sound, and the additives of the blister want to compromise the parts that are divided into segments, and they begin to push and lead them, then you must know that you have to pause a small amount of the angle of the blister that punctured the flesh, and push it inside and insert it into the flesh with ease, and pause over it until the corrosive drugs of the medicines that are burning come out; and the care will be cured when it is completely healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	When corruption has already set in within the bones, you should immediately cut away the affected bone and its surroundings, as no time is lost if it is the bone that is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the corruption and corruption often occur in that place, you should immediately cut away that part according to which side is remembered, and carefully care for it as soon as it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is pain at the end of the thigh and it becomes more severe, you should immediately cut open the thigh, and carefully clean the area with water, making sure to not let the cut reach the flesh that is yet left in the place; and carefully care for that area as soon as the pain subsides, and make sure that the cause of the pain is not superfluous in the location.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	If there is any adjustment that is often found in the largest number of men, it is mostly flesh, and mostly in the bones or in the thighs.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And if the sons of it are born in the joint, or is the origin of them in the flesh of the joints?
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	When a person is not born in cold regions, it does not harm them, and a person born in joint pain regions is more prone to it.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	When those who are from the country are cut, and it is necessary to insert the blade, you must insert it at an angle of 45 degrees.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	When the person is born in the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore, keep away from the abscess of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the person is born in the eye, you must pay attention to the teeth; and therefore, insert the blade at the beginning of the flesh, and then cut it with one of those convenient razors, and cure that within which is healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Less consolidation is caused by the wounds that occur between the joints of the visible or native limbs, or due to the consolidation of the plague or combustion of the fire, or for its resemblance, therefore, pay attention to the return of those wounds to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And stop between them the enfused threads in rose oil so that they are not consolidated too much, and separate between them or place a thin layer of silk between them after it is consolidated as it is possible to see.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If it seems that there is consolidation in any part of the palm, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and adapted to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the scar, it is varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are varicose veins, and they are fat, full of melancholic superfluities that flow through the members of the body, and more so in the thighs and buttocks, and especially in the thighs and buttocks of travelers and laborers and those who wear tight clothing.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	However, it is important that you administer purification of the heart of black blood through some veins that are expelled with force, and then take blood from the patient from the basilar vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of them is second only to two hands: one is that it is inscribed and struck with the dark sanctuary, and the other hand raises the vein and extracts all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision of the member is made according to this hand: the doctor begins by cutting the cauda of the member, after which the sac is removed that contains the gallbladder, and the hand strengthens the sac of the thigh at the point where the wound is clean and dry, and presses the vein in a place, or in two, or in three according to the size of the incision, and raises the black sac am the tip of the wound inside the member, and desus in juice, after which the sac contains as much of the gallbladder as you want and as many times as it can hold, and it tolerates the virtue of the thigh.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	When you have applied the ointment and commanded him to abstain from black, colorful clothing that causes colic,
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	and continue the cure with incision if the veins are dilated and you notice swelling in the thigh,
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Then elevate the thigh as follows: you who raise the thigh, if it is tight, and place the thigh in the bucket and massage the thigh with warm water that flows in when it contracts and the veins are swollen; or if it has been exercised by strenuous exercise, if the bucket is not at your disposal, then when the member is sore,
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	and cut the tendon at the right of the vein for incision on the long or short side of the thigh, or on the inside of the thigh, you must take the skin.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	and cut the tendon with an inch and remove the vein from the entire area where it appears at the sensation, and you must take the appearance of the vein that sometimes goes into the black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so when you cut and remove the tendon, you see that white string is rope.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	When you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands, then you should place your hand on the elevated and swollen part of the knee, and suspend the thread on that one.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another cut in the same place for three times, and remove the skin from the area where the vein appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise that and insert the tendon into the second cut, and remove that and lift it within which is soft for the second cut, and remove that from the cut that is over it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And make that within which you remove the entire pus from all cuts, and then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey and extract and raise it, then insert a needle of double strength and tighten it on that and remove it, or insert the thread first and rotate your hand over the entire area where it is inflamed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And keep in mind that it is not inserted; then if it is torn, it will be difficult to raise that arm and it will come over the thigh for that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the whole wound is fully exposed, place yourself over the location of the submerged hairy skin, which is either red or not red, and care for that as it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the wound is obstructed by an obstacle that envelops all parts of it, and there is no straight path after that, then you should cover that with your hand over the entire obstruction of the wound and the surrounding areas of the wound, and suspend it in that manner as you raise it to the level where it was originally.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And keep your section safe that you have not pierced the vein and that it does not cause any damage; and use your prudence in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the incision made by the wound is:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of a gout:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not the accutely pointed wound as the cautery or of sharp extremity by which it would pierce the vein; and it is of great flexibility, if it were subtle, would pierce the vein by its subtlety; there are in it superfluous roughness of the wound as they have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs of low-lying lands, such as the Ategi in Arabia and in the low, dry lands of India with little fertility and without grass or shrubs.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	When the pain is caused by other parts of the body, other changes occur.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The cause of the pain is putrid matter that I see coming out of the chest, like venom from snakes and spiders and scorpions, which are born between the chest and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	The susceptibility to the occurrence of pain is due to this vein that occurs in this inflamed and swollen area; and the location is pustulated; and the vein begins to appear at the location of that pustule, which seems to be of plant origin.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when it appears at the end, you cover that one with a pouch of blood from the which is the foot of a dragon. Enter into it, and notice that one and let the blood hang down from the swelling.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	So many wonders have been seen by the cause of the pain in the deformed parts, covered with blood and noticed.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is prolonged, you insert a part of the body and envelope the wound; and if not inserted, that is outside and in, then if inserted, it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes apposition and pother and ulceration in the place and malodor.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	When treating swelling and removing it little by little, enter when it has been expelled from the body and does not return to the body without any cause in the chest.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	This vein is usually found in men who have a long distance of twenty fingers and I have heard that one of them has been twenty-two fingers long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is inserted at the time of medication, insert the ray into the throat and pierce that long throat through the chest, entering when all of this matter has been evacinated from the body and administer putrefaction to the place for several days with medicines; and cure it with the cure of apostemas.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein has some varicose veins, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and goes to that orrifice, and is found in many orrifices, and is located in many orrifices.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And cure it as has been said in the division and according to what has been said.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the cut, the generated veins under the skin are called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This malady is caused by a cow's udder, as if several wheats have been seen in the belly and there is a little one that comes between the spine and the flesh, and it goes all over the body and causes pain, and it is shown in the feeling of the member to member that comes out of the spine.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of the child is caused by the putrefaction of some humors, such as worms, snakes, and insects, and feces in the intestines.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the wickedness of him, that when he comes to the heart and is raised to the head, and passes through the neck, if he stretches it too much, then the neck bends and the vertebrae are destroyed, and thus many wounds are caused.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And then when you want to heal that and remove it, you should not do so if you do not have the ambulance and appearance of the member in your hand, and then cover that which is over it and that which is further away from it with a wet cloth and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it presses on the flesh and does not burn, then you should stop cauterization with a hot iron over the place from which it comes, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the flesh which corrupts the place as they have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you ever see that it has come to the head of the neck, then you should hold firmly over the tightened scalp with a wet cloth and extract that; and cover that this evil is used for the improvement of the healthy heart by medicines that expel putrid humors from the body and prevent the generation of putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This affliction is common in our land, and it causes pain that spreads to different parts of the body, and it can affect one part of the body after another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	When you have already seen that which I recommended to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to attend a woman with a swollen arm in a village, and I found that her arm had a small inflammation in the funis vein, and after an hour, I saw that the inflammation had disappeared as if it had been turned into something else, but I did not insist on whether it was true or false.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain in that place became apparent and remained in the muscle, and after an hour, it stopped.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And I cured the other arm that was affected by the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And I recommend that you revive the other arm if you see that this one is affected by the other arm; and it is too wonderful to change the position of the limb and the speed of the member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And you had already seen that in the best hands this would have been done, but you have seen that those who do not suffer from pain want to exchange members for limbs.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I did not see that in the hands as I saw in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	When I first realized that it was not gout but something else, it was because the woman was very young, with a corpulent body and visible veins, and in this case, there was a feeling of that altered sensation.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this posterior cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have corpulent veins that are not easily affected.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the patient's cure and they feel that pain, then you should not immediately appear at their side as they have been told, but rather stay there and hold their hand and cover that area with something warm and then cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not see the woman's face, then you should cure her with your cure and expel that altered sensation from the heart and this that expels ventsitudes, and carminative pills of those made from saffron and serapin and semblants.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of sage.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sage is diverse according to the species and the locations of the heart where it is extracted, for the greatest diversity is found in those that have large points, and small, concave, and narrow ones, and they are solid; and from those that have three angles, and from those that have tongues, and from those that have stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	When the second member or limb is affected, two forceps are used: those that grasp the principal members such as the brain, heart, lungs, intestines, and testicles; and then when you notice that in one of these members or limbs there is a sign of death, which causes you to recommend that you avoid extraction from that sauce in which the death appears in those where it is more disposable, and if you do not see these bad signs in the first member or limb, and the sauce is not disturbed in the depth of the member, then you extract that and treat the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When the second member or limb is affected, if you notice that in it there are signs of death, which causes you to recommend that you avoid extraction from that sauce in which the death appears, and if you do not see these bad signs in the first member or limb, and the sauce is not disturbed in the depth of the member, then you extract that and treat the plague. If you notice that in the second member or limb there are signs of death, such as the brain being affected by violent inflammation, loss of vision, vertigo, and collapse of the limbs, and swelling of the tongue, and spasms and permixtion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the word is cut off and destroyed the voice, and you see the sign of the plague in a wet white-like appearance resembling polls, and you see the sign approaching the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	If you see these symptoms appearing, then avoid the cure and the extraction of the pus, unless it comes out.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When the woman's labor pains are felt in the belly, and that side of her is nearest to the left, and it feels like a movement of the hand, and the pulse is black and watery, and there is coldness in the extremities, and shivering, and sweating; and you see that death is coming on, then you know that she is about to give birth.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the woman's labor pains are felt in the belly, and that side of her is nearest to the left, and it feels like a movement of the hand, and the pulse is black and watery, and there is coldness in the extremities, and shivering, and sweating; and you see that death is coming on, then you know that she is about to give birth.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the woman's labor pains are felt in the sacrum which is in the chest, and the pain occurs in the small backbones, and great pain is felt in the belly, and the breath is so spasmodic, and not all the muscles of the body are involved.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the woman's labor pains are felt in the stomach, the pain is strong and it feels like vomiting undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the physician is in the belly, and it is fixed there, and any part of the plague, or cloth, or intestine that is disrupted, and there is no hope for the removal of the physician from the belly.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the physician is in the bladder, and it is discharged into urine, and processed by any cause to the affected parts, and there is great pain in the thighs, you know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Other parts of the body are similar to the face, neck, and shoulders, as well as the spine, vertebrae, and acromion, and the shoulder blades, and the armpits, and they resemble the limbs when the physician does not block veins or arteries and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend this to you that you have seen of the nature of these physicians, because it indicates for you about the cure of the second kind.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man who has a physician in the lacrimal duct of the eye, and you extract it from another part, then the grays of the eyebrow are cured, and it does not accumulate in the hollow of the nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	When I extracted another sage from a Jew who had it in his gray matter, the eyelid was pulled down, and the sage was already hidden and not found except for a small extremity that adhered to the eye socket, and it was a great sage of the sharp sages of the Turks, with a leopard's claw in which there were no pearls.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Senate is the Jew, and it did not happen to the eye socket badly.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another sage from a man Crestian who had it in the groin, and it was an Arab sage, and that was the one with the pearls; and then I inserted it between those guides, and it was already submerged in the groin of him; and then I softened it there, and extracted it, and cured the Crestian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another sage from a man who had it in the stomach, and thought that it was for that; and then, because I passed three hundred days and did not change anything about it due to its dispositions, I inserted it over the sage and operated on it, and cured him, and it did not happen to that accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	When you see a man who has a spear in his back, and the wound is closed and swollen, and it has been a week and a half, and the spearhead is still in the thigh, then you should remove it.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	When you see a woman who has a spear in her abdomen, and the wound is closed and solidified, and it has not moved from its original position, and the woman does not have any problems in any of her natural functions, then you should remove it.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	When you see another man who has a spear in his face, and the wound is closed and solidified, and the spearhead is not moving, and there is no pain here, and it seems that he is fine with this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	When you remove the spear from the man of the princes of the king who had it in the left side of his nose and had declined to the right part of a small piece, and the entire spearhead was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called to the care of the man in three days for the wound of the spearhead that had entered.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you removed the wound of the spearhead with great effort; and then you asked that woman subtly, and did not feel it; but you felt the point at the end of the spearhead, and then you wondered if that point was at the tip of the spear.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I will make the place where it is most attractive and digestive, ensuring that this place supports my appearance as the location of the sage, so that it passes over that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	When no accident occurs in the location where you have successfully achieved that place; and you continue to apply pressure over it for several days and no accident occurs; and the plague becomes consolidated, and the hernia of the extremity of the thigh is held in place by the space for several days until one day the surgeon notices that the patient's leg is painful and returns to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you continue to apply the acute, corrosive medicine for several days until it burns, and you touch that, and you remove the intestine, and you tighten the extremity of the hernia, which adheres to the fist.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And you adjust the incision of the plague with that acute medicine until the extremity of the hernia is visible, and it passes my time for several months within the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then you push the focus of the plague, and it is possible to enter the forceps into it, and you maintain that, and you do not obstruct the cessation, and you continue to subtly and inventively apply it over those with the engine, when one day you began to use forceps to remove it from the focus of the capillary, according to the form of those in the end of the capillary, and you extracted it; and you restored that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	When the doctors found that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and you restored it and the plague is consolidated, and the whole body becomes healthy, and does not return to its former state for any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some sages for which you pause this rule and its significance about it that I have not said, four parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood by me in narration nor do I understand those free.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the inventors of this art compare less about motion; and I think that this is present about what is absent; and the new operation is novel and the novel instrument must be the descent of the strange causes of the art when it happens.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And you say that sages are not outside the members in which they are fixed only by two hands: either by attraction of the place where it is inserted, or by the contrary of another part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is gripped by the place where it is inserted, or is a sage proceeding in flesh and is gripped and released.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If the swelling does not subside by the hour in which the cat is caught, you should lay it down for several days until the flesh that surrounds it is healed and the attraction of the cat is relieved.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If it seems that the swelling has settled in the bone and does not subside by your inspection, you should lay it down for several days and reinspect it every day, and it will eventually be cured.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If the swelling does not subside by your inspection in several days, you should make a hole in the circuit of the saucepan around that bone part and extract it, and it will be cured.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the saucepan is stuck in the skull and has already been processed in one of the cavities of the brain, and appears in the abscess of those accidents that you have told me, you should not extract the saucepan and lay it down for several days until it is equal to the abscess; if the saucepan pierces the cerebellum, the death of the saucepan is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the scar does not exist only in the chest of the bone, and does not pass through the knee joint, and the leg is affected for several days, and no such accidents occur due to these incidents, then you should pay attention to the cause of this injury and its consequences.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If the scar is fixed and does not obey your extraction, you should administer treatments in the circuit of the scar according to what has been recommended, and apply care to the area that has become healthy.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the scar has already been banned in the location of the chest, and is banned from sentiment, you should inquire about that am, and if you feel it, you should attack that am with the most convenient stitches for the treatment of the leg.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the restriction of the plague and its length, and there are no nerves or veins here, you should proceed with the plague when it is amplified and it is possible to extract the scar.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is held by the heels that are held, you should cut the flesh in which it is fixed from total part; and pay attention to this, if you cannot escape the flesh in the fracture of the heels and in the twist of those that obey.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you are performing the extraction of the gallbladder in any location where it is, use your own twist of the forceps at all parts that pass through the sageta; and carefully at subtlety that the gallbladder is not torn and is flat at your difficult attraction of the gallbladder and the extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that about the gallbladder of your time, use your hand for several days after the parts that are in the circuit of the gallbladder, and proceed to that which you will be able to do.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you are in opposition to the flow of the blood, use what has been said for the cure in the capital city.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of incision of the vein or of the nerves, or of the cord, and administer anesthesia in all parts of your possible to the escape of the gallbladder; and do what is easy and calm and slow and firm as you and your prescribed.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And if you make the gallbladder contract so that the thigh is second to the figure second to the one that you must focus on the pain of the gallbladder in it, which is less useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not possible for you, then administer this remedy as best as you can using the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	If the sutures that are outside the opposite part are cut by the contrary of another part, or if any part has already undergone treatment on another part, or if there is concern about the extrusion of the suture due to the feeling of the part pressed against the previous one and sometimes to that eminent; then you should cut over that; and the incision should be according to the quantity that was grasped by the forceps; and then attract it, so that it is slightly pressed into the cessation.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is held in the bone, then you should twist the suture according to the opposite direction as the suture presses on the bone, and increase the force, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for a few days, and repeat it as needed.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the end of the suture is in that, then you should press on that with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the end is cut and you want to administer compression, then you should insert and that suture, if it is narrow, straighten it by hand so that it fits between the concavity of the bone and the concave side of the suture and then press on that with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the belly is hollow, then you should press on that side with a strong force, so that the belly sinks into that part.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the belly is intoxicated, then you should make sure to hollow out the entire flesh where the liver is located, as much as possible, and apply cure to that part which is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the belly is caught in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the vesica, or in the side, and it is near that part where the pain is located, and you can easily reach it, then you should cut through that part, and hold onto it, and take out that part, and remove any veins or nerves that are near it, and put it back in, and if it is possible, cure that part as soon as it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps used to hold the belly:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of them are like the teeth of a saw, which are sharp when we hold onto the belly to prevent it from being cut.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And those are special movements, large and few or many, according to the size of the belly and the width of the pelvis, and the extent of the swelling, and the constriction of the intestine.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The first source sentence translates to: "Shape of expelling the pain from this extremity is like a knuckle that is hurt by something and has the intestine of the stomach in it, and the impulse of that darkness:".
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The first line of the text is a bit unclear without additional context. However, based on the following lines, it seems that this phrase might be referring to
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	ayssi "how" as if it were "according to how" or "as follows." The rest of the line seems to be describing the process of removing an inguinal hernia by pushing it back into the abdominal cavity through an incision made in the groin.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	This sentence translates to "Of varicose veins." However, without the context of the entire text, it's ch
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	This sentence translates to: "Of the veins subject to varicose veins, which are those that are most commonly treated with varicose vein surgery, such as those located in the neck, the two temporal arteries, and the two lacrimal veins of the two eyes, which are called aspirins; the vessel prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vessel located at the end of the nose; and dogs that are located in the collar, and the vessels located at the corner of the mouth, and the vessels located at the corner of the mouth; and — these are the veins that are called varicose veins —; and the veins that are located at the end of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	When the veins that have been cut in the breasts are looked at, four of them are a cephalic vein, and it is necessary to use the wild rose; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is narrow, and it is a migraine vein, and it is composed of one branch from the basilica, and another branch from the cephalic vein; and that vein is called "the vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic garden, and it is called "citellar," and the common people call that the vein of the stomach; and the funis of the breast, and it is paused over the focus, and it is that one in which the fleubotomy is done, and it is that one which appears above the poutz for apparent manifestation; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between what is said to the ear and the little one said, and it is in those two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot there are three veins; one of those is where the curvature of the domestic rose is left, and the second is sophena, and the location of it is where the domestic garden's camba is, and the sciatic vein, and its location is where the domestic rose's camba is, and in the camba there are other venas similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The cause of the swelling of the veins that are nearest to the ankles is catarrh of the ancient kind, and emigration and ulcers of the old, unhealthy cap.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	E la qualità di sagginare quelle è secondo che tu mi consigli a te: è che sia ras il cap del malaute, e sia freguat il cap del malaute nel occipito nel luogo delle venie ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha la malaute la siu col am una benda entro che apparen le doas e le locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en due luoi premegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am il tuo dit, e se tu senti i pols di quelle am il tuo dit tuo, qui senha am tenta.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	When you take hold of the scalpel and that which it is incident upon, and then introduce that point into the vein within which the flap will meet the bone, you have to be very careful not to cut too deeply.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise the vein and the coda up to its parts, and insert the vein into the incision made earlier.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And is the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers' width or less, and it should be made as short as possible.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply pressure with your thumbs and hold that within until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And before the end of the free incision, make the cauterization of those and their parts.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Most of the arteries are venous veins that serve as the support for the flap cutting, and they are old and unhealthy, and frequently infected with sharp-edged, excessive exudates in the edges.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of the flap cutting those is second to what I recommend to you: tighten the thigh, so that you can feel the arteries when they appear with a clear sensation and demonstrate the tips of their parts, and then you should try to hit them.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And when you raise the codena over the vein of the parts where the aforementioned indicator is located, and insert the fleubotomi incision here, and raise the vein in its place; and insert it according to the quantity of your necessity in the other veins.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And when you remove the abscess of the thigh, and place the aforementioned indicator on the vein for an hour, and place it over that cloth and powder and tighten that which is under great constraint, and leave it within until it is cured.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And before the memory of them and those who have been incised, and the attraction at the beginning of freedom,
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the benefit of fleubotomy on the vein of the front is that the fleubotomy of the cephalica is for the old wounds of the face and for emigrants and rogors and uncared-for ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the fleubotomy of you is according to what you recommend to me; so it is that the abscess stretches the collar around which the vein appears; and hold the instrument that is named fossor of which this is the form of you:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point that is on the top of the fossa over the vein and cover it with something, whether it is a penny or another cause in the hand of the patient, and leave it to run according to the quantity that you want; and remove the puncture from the thigh and tighten that which is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	If some incisions are made, it is better to make them with a sharp edge, but do not cover the incision so that it does not have the sharp extremity of the others, and the incision should be made on the side of the transversal, where the bones are placed and the knife can easily cut through the flesh of the incision when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The two veins that are in the tear ducts of two eyes for scabies of the eyes and sclera, and the maladies of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the incision is that the thigh stretches the collar, and the incisions are made on those, and you should stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	If the incision is subtle, it is better to make it on the side of the transversal a little long, where there is no flesh; and if the incisions are subtle, then the end of the flesh is cut.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And if you wish to run the course of the humor as much as is necessary for you, and pause on those points, and stretch them with a new one, and then remove them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Many of the varices of the nose are attributed to acute fever and severe sweating, as well as to the diseases of the face, such as boils and rashes that occur in the face, and most importantly when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the varicose vein is that it stretches the waist and brings the nose closer to the left side of the face, and holds the varices subtly long and places them in the middle of the cap of the nose, second rectitude, where the vein does not appear at the sensation here, and where the humor begins to flow so much.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover that you have recently made the varices small by small and run them according to your need; and then place it on that part with a new one, where it is restored more gently.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Many of the benefits of varicose veins guide the constriction of alcohol and the beginning of leprosy, as well as the onset of skin diseases, such as mothes and wounds, and corrosive ulcers, like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the fleebotomy in those cases is that the thigh stretches out on either side; and the surgeons should be over the knee, and the patient should be placed on a bed.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	The fleebotomy should be made in the length of the thigh that is affected, and a small incision should be made at a time or another according to the need; and it should give the appearance of another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	The thigh should be loosened and the veins in the tight area should be stretched, so that the patient does not become frenzied, and the wound should be entered when the plague is cured.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The advantage of the fleebotomy of the veins is that it reduces small apothecary shops and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and the bad ulcers in the nose and throat.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the fleebotomy in those cases is that it reduces the pain in the patient, and tightens the thigh of the patient with a bend, and turns the lips of the patient and looks at the veins of which one is on the left side of the lip and the other on the right; and the demonstration of each is by the nail of each tooth, and it is less in the circuit of those dark veins; and then insert each in a scarlet scar.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you doubt further, and do not know which of those it is, then you should understand the signs of the majority of them, and the manifestation of that one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the veins seem to be in the lips of those.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	If it is customary to see many veins in the lips of those.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	If there are fewer veins in the tongue, which is the best indication for cefalocele of the head, uvular malformation, and malformations of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of flebotomy is that it follows the throat between the most important parts of the soul, and raises the tongue up, and looks further at the tongue, of one vein of the lats and another vein of the lats, and the color of each one is darkening to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And do flebotomy to each one; and keep in mind that you do not end the veins of those before flebotomy, as they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the veins in your groin that have been previously opened are in the area where it is common for all men to have them, and the veinotomy on their legs is done with two forceps, or place am le fleubotomi mirtilat or olivar at subtlety declining; or else sec the fleubotomi cutellar, and call if alnessil, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	This passage is about the first source sentence to translate, which is a medical procedure called "seccio" that involves cutting and dividing certain parts of the body based on the size of the veins and the tightness of the tissues. The text suggests that this procedure should be performed with care and precision, as it can have significant effects on the body's functions.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	The text "Forma de fleubotomi mirti" is not a complete sentence and does not provide enough
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	This passage is discussing the anatomy of the body and the structure of certain organs. The text suggests that the latex of the body should be examined to determine the number of times it has been used, and that the veins should be opened if they are full and appear to be large, as they may contain blood clots. The text also mentions that some organs may have a larger size than others.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This passage is discussing the method of "fleubotomi" or "olivari," which is a medical procedure used to cut and divide certain parts of the body
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	This passage is describing the method of "fleubotomi" as being less invasive and having a more precise exit point, and that it should be used for dividing veins that contain small amounts of subtle substances. The text suggests that this procedure should be performed with care to avoid causing any damage to the surrounding tissues.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	This passage is discussing the benefits of the "fleubotomi" procedure on the basilica vein, which is one of the three main veins in the body. The text suggests that this procedure can help to remove toxins from the blood and improve the overall health of the body. The procedure involves cutting and dividing the vein to allow for better circulation and to prevent the buildup of harmful substances.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	It is advised to the surgeon, when performing a flebotomy, that they take care to save that vein and keep it above the area where the flebotomy will be performed, and if they err and adjust the needle in the puncture of the flebotomy, they will rupture that artery and cause fluids to flow, so that they do not accidentally cut the vein during the flebotomy, they should carefully cut along the line.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear clearly, you should cover that and move to another place or encircle some ram around it; or if you perform the flebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible, and cut that above the flebotomy like they have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform the flebotomy on the metheglin, you should cover the stricture of the arm that touches the location within which the location of the fingers is found, and place your hand over it as you please; and cut the arm and section the vein with a concave incision at the flebotomy site like they have said, and make sure that you cover the percussion for the space around the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you see, as you stretch the limb, inflammation occurs in the location that you have seen, and that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and then it swells.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If the blood flows in the fleurition of the arteria, and it is subtle rog, then you know that it is the sanc of the arteria; and you take and place your hand over it on that for long space; and after that leave the hand, and if the sanc escapes, four watches escape, then you strengthen the arm and let go of that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	You should guard the wound of the patient's foot, and place it over the thigh and do not remove it for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the suture does not come out, and sometimes you are not present to give medicine as soon as it is needed, you should insert the artery if it appears; or at the extremity of the foot, and the suture comes out; or that takes an old stick, and flexes it, and holds one end on the location of the vein in stricture, and the other end over the pulsation for another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the suture comes out, it is; and otherwise, you cure that of which was preceded by the rememoration of the location of the powders that come out of the sutures.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the suture is difficult in positions that are not suitable for the small location of the plague and the possibility of the pulse in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	More often than not, the flebotomy of the dark vein is advantageous to remove the suture from the subincised head and the part below the chest; therefore, it is made up of the ram of the basilica and the ram of the cephalic vein, as they have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	When the anesthesia is applied to that which is feared in the anesthesia of the patient, then it is a nerve; and if it adjusts in the puncture of the anesthesia and paralyzes the nerve, it will cause the patient's stupor, and it is difficult to cure the patient, and for most people it is not cured completely. And this nerve moves with the sensation; and if it is hidden in certain men and is subtle and not shown, then you cover the anesthesia with your hand that you use to hold the anesthesia with your own strength, and avoid the nerve with your own strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is between two nerves, then you should find the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of the anesthesia of the cranial vein is that it relieves the pain of the head and alleviates the discomforts of the scalp.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And if you want to anesthetize the flesh of the ear or the flesh of the eye, then it is the same as anesthetizing any other part of the body; and all the veins are saved, and neither the artery nor the nerves are affected.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	May I suggest that you perform the circumcision that you have prepared for the patient, as the circumcision does not hurt the tail of the serpent just so, and surrounds the location with a guard, and does not notice it if not, as it is not affected by the first impact that is over the circumcision some watchful eyes.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, if the patient is very afraid when not performing the circumcision in the first impact, he will not notice it in the future.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the circumcision of that and the accidents of the patient, in which you must think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of the patient is that you know that circumcision is not performed without the preservation of health and hope for the patient and caution from the risk of diseases, and that a fleabite circumcision in one of the veins that are in the thigh is: cephalic, black and basilic; and that a fleabite circumcision at the beginning of primavesera, over the descent in primavesera and autumn, and in winter when significant signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	When there is joint pain caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This condition is called fleubotomy, and it should be treated on the third day or the first time it occurs, after three hours have passed since the pain started.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more frequently gout is treated, the better the results will be, whether it causes convenience and necessity at that time, or on another day, in the same hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	However, if gout has not been treated within fourteen years, and a woman has not been treated within the fourth month of the seventh month, and the elderly have not been treated within sixty years, they should be treated immediately.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wishes to be treated for gout with any method, it is recommended that the intestines be cleaned before undergoing gout treatment, if they have not been engorged, so that the veins do not cause superfluity in the gout of the bowels, which are pure, and do not harm the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And if the patients are not treated for gout with a nourishing and cleansing diet, nor are they dehydrated or depleted of energy within the same time period as the gout, nor is there any edema or abscess, nor is there any bad habit or excessive exercise, nor any cause that dissolves the virtue, or if the body or animal is not treated, then the gout should be treated with a nourishing and cleansing diet, and dehydration or depletion of energy within the same time period as the gout, and no edema or abscess, nor any bad habit or excessive exercise, nor any cause that dissolves the virtue.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And if you consider in subtleity of humors that are thus, if the gall is large, it is thin and bitter, and if medicines are available, then it is possible to use them for this purpose.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if you enter in the bath if any cause does not prohibit it or is exercised by some exercise for that gall to become subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the fleebotomy of the gall in the chest, so it is time for third hour, as they have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And tell me what that chest is to be guarded in that day of all animal accidents, as they have said, with anguish, rage, fear, and all corporal accidents, as they work and pain is superfluous and cunning and deceptive as it appears to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at its seizure, the causes are to be present in the use of the quality that people usually use for aromaticity and fragrance and for balms and semblances as follows, according to the number of possibilities.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the fleebotomist on a cushion that is placed whether or not that cushion of the one who has to be fleebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And take the other arm, and make points on that side with the scalpel or three times; and stretch the limb and involve those points.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	If the stricture is too tight, that is, if the stricture does not allow for passage or if it is an excessive tightening, then you are forbidden to give blood; or if it is a softening, and you are forbidden to give blood to the body.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then, if the stricture is too loose, that is, if one who gives blood causes pain in the member between them when entering, and the veins are inflamed, and it is declared as such.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	Then, if the blood-letter uses an ancient ointment quite a little; and then pauses the hand on the member over the vein, at that place where you want to do the blood-letting, so that the vein may be a little cut, and the percussion is set aside as much as possible of the veins which are thus stretched by the blood-letting, and of those which are full of wind and when you pause the blood-letting over the member you must also move the blood-letter; and the blood-letting does not cut the vein, and if it does cut, it is twisted.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, in order that this flesh-eating knife may be stopped and aroused in all of these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	When you have paused the dissection, if the vein is swollen in a vein, then do so; otherwise, you will continue to another vein further on that location or over it, if that location is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is inflamed, or the thigh is swollen, you should lay on it for a day or two, and do not strain the limbs, as they may become infected with gangrene, nor should you put them in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And if you continue the dissection if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the abscess is small and moves subtly, and you fear that it will not clear the amount you want, then continue the dissection in that direction with a straight line and adjust the incision a little, and if the location is inflamed, then make a few incisions on the affected part to clear the abscess.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	And if the abscess has already become inflamed, then do not continue on it, as there is no cause for you to avoid it; and pause on that certain part of the needle, where the corset of the skin is released, and hold it with your hand.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	This is better in this place than oil and the others.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	It seems that olive oil is better in all types of surgery, as it helps to prevent blood clots and reduces pain when the doctor presses on one of those areas over the location, making the sanc subtle and turning it around when it becomes large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If in the location of the fleebotomy a large abscess is formed, where moving parts are affected, and mainly that which has not been bled except for that vein, or in the inflammation of the small vein, and you cut it, and place your hand over the location, soaking it in water and salt, a little scrubbed, and hold it for an hour, where it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover that with this oil to properly close the wound of that vein, either by the same vein or another one.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If Roman comes to the location for several days with any black or green color, it is not noticed; and if you want, place your hand on that cause of aloe and dissolution, or any cause of sweat from the mentastre or calamite or semblant of the same.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	When the visible movements of the postures and eminences are not enough, a surgical operation of the basilica is required.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so, stop your work there and place your hand over that part, and if you tighten your compression over that area, that prominence is evil and bad; and then keep doing it until you find a reason for this that they have said, for sure the blood will flow from the artery sane.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply here what is sterilized, so that the place is endurant, and apply care to that with the other cure when it is cured.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	E if you take out of the vein all that is needed from each man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that comes out of the vein, according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the vein is black, you should take it out as soon as it appears to be red; and apparently, if it seems large, you should take it out as soon as it is subtle; and apparently, if it is sharp, as soon as the sharpness of it is gone.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if you take out of the man who is large and strong and needs extraction of a vein, that the fleebotomy of the vein is amplified and the fleebotomy is flat.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	When one is in a cold place, make the opposite of that, and cover it with troops visible, and let it straighten out.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best way to administer venous phlebotomy is that the transverse section be made, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This maneuver of phlebotomy is saved from the flow of blood and the injury to the nerves, and it is praised and said to be a safe phlebotomy at that latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And it is customary to occur spontaneously after the phlebotomy, and cover that you cure that of the phlebotomy with a small amount of an infusion of one milliliter or simple oximel; and extract from the sac in three or four veins.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a fever of the collection, then you take infusion from the phlebotomy in an earthenware pot or in an aromatic earthenware pot with specific aromas such as cinnamon, ginger, and similar scents, or in an aromatic earthenware pot with a pleasant odor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If you encounter hernias, and it causes the swelling of the testicle, then take care to catch the urine in a bowl of warm water and apply something subtle to odor; and use aromaticity from some herb, and place the hand on the affected part.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes that have been said in the division of the head of hernias for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if you want to dissolve the hand and evacuate the testicle secondarily, take care of the one where the herniotomy was performed for the evacuation, and the virtue of it is freckled, which evacuates the testicle little by little, so it is according to the amount of virtue in the days that follow.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Many times you want to dissolve the hand and evacuate the testicle secondarily, and the hand is strong, then make the testicle leave that in about seven hours or nine days after the first herniotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Many times you want to pull the testicle out of the hand against the direction of the incision, taking care that it happens on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When the body is already scalded and sharp, and a fever sets in, which is a symptom of the saint's pain in one vein and a large amount of it, and the perception of the saint's pain is amplified throughout the area where it occurs without interruption, then you will have preserved all the conditions for flebotomy; and you must place your hand over the saint's chest, so that the body of the saint does not die in place of sinusitis, four veins are opened when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And if you do not know when to slide the arm and evacuate the saint's second vein, as the wound of the vein is closed and it is difficult for the saint to pass through, then you must press subtly under that with great force and curve your extension slightly, so that it is too much.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	If the layssa is inside the flebotomy; or remains there at the acuteness of the flebotomy that coagulates in the wound of the vein; or presses over that of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and comprehends that compression more gently within which the saint is outside and suffering.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is inflamed, then you should avoid touching that area and let it be.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it requires you to evacuate the sanction immediately, and there is no exception, then you should mark that location on that side or on the other arm with another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called "thigh vein" is incised in the location of the knee or the elbow, when it is not atrophied or wasted, and it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the flebotomy of that vein is that it introduces its hand into the animal's belly, and if the wound tightens around the limb and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then hold your strength over that animal, and perform the flebotomy according to the transverse cut, not laterally or according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	If the wound is wide and your flebotomy is at that location over the joint of the arm, then you should flebotomize a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of the sanction is prohibited, then you should insert your hand into the animal's belly and let the sanction run in the animal as you can fulfill your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, you would be excused for the repetition of the water in the tail, and the more it pauses the heart's course in water, the better it is.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The first line of the text translates to: "And the safer way for this vein is that out of all the others, here it has no pulse nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The first line of the text translates to: "And the surgery of the ankle of the big toe is called the diseases of the foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the liposuction of the patient is that you strengthen the leg or the thigh, because you have placed it in the groin, and if the vein is inflamed and is being demonstrated at the same time; and the liposuction is transverse; and if they are all inserted, this will not cause any harm to the patient.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	When preserving the final part of your dissection, then remove the last layers of skin from the body parts you have exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And if you do not iterate the sinus in the tail cavity and let it run along the artery, then the sinus will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when you extract the sinus according to the amount of necessity, then place your hand over the vein or vessel, so that it is not firmly consolidated; and it seems that you will have to do this in all cases.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The advantage of the dissection on that side of the patient's body is that it reveals the maladies of the table.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do it in a similar way in the dissection of the other side as you have done in this one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The advantage of the dissection of the vein is that it reveals the maladies that were in the part of the body that was exposed during the dissection, such as those found in the thighs, and the retention of menstrual blood, and the ulcers and old wounds of the buttocks and legs, and their resemblance to the maladies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the fleshotomy is that it enters the limb into the watery cavity and covers the affected area where the veins appear; it is placed over the joint of the foot with a prick; and the location of the vein appears at the tip, which should be pointed towards the face of the foot with the toes pointing downwards.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Then, the fleshotomy of the pus is large or the cushion is placed further down the leg, where the prick should be added to the closure of the wound, which is better and allows for greater drainage.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you fleshotomy on the face of the foot, pay attention to the nerves that are still present over the face of the foot, and stop your fleshotomy at the point where you wish to insert it, as if you were inserting it through the hole.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if the fleshotomies are yours.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	However, if the insertion of the sanction is prohibited, you should move the foot of the patient into the watery cavity and let the sanction run through the entrance where it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cautery erroneously hits the first vein, then repeat it on the same spot until the area is sore; and do not fear the malician, rather than guarding yourself from the nerves as they have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	When it seems that the other foot has an erection.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	If it is the sciatic nerve that causes pain, then you should remove the tail from the cavity of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the advantage of the flebotomy operation is that it can be done when there is pain in the ankle.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the flebotomy operation is that it quickly and firmly presses on the leg of the ankle within the thigh, and four or five needles are inserted under the skin at once with one long, thin needle, which does not hurt.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, you should flebotomize that second vein that is closest to you and the second transverse, and it is better; or if you are not able to insert it, you can cut it with a scissors or cut it with a knife, and the place for the needle is sal.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is not uncommon for men to have it; and if you apply it there and do not feel anything, then you can flebotomize any part of the leg, and that which appears in the two feet of the ankle and the ear and the ring.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	When you hold the nerves, and run the quantity that you need.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then loosen the stricture and place your hand over the location of the herniotomy incision, which strengthens the location. The sooner it heals.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of wind and the quality of its use.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Wind is of corn, or of ashes, or of eyes.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And wind is made by two methods: one of them is the scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is the winding itself.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this winding that has its scarification is made by two methods: one of them is the focus or the focus.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the winds that are administered by scarification and blood extraction are fourteen locations of the body, of which one is located at the place where the previous winds were placed, and the other part is the right side of the neck; and ventozacio of the right collarbone; and ventozacio of the mandible from the mouth; and ventozacio of two spatulas; and ventozacio of two candles; and ventozacio of two brasses; and ventozacio of two cavities; and ventozacio of two holes.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	A surgical operation does not extract the poison unless it is taken from the tiny, spare veins in the flesh, and therefore does not cause harm to those; nor is it certain that a surgical operation is a type of focus or its focus in any other afflicted part for repletion after the whole body has been emptied.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	When labor pains are caused by obstruction or continuance, administer the remedy at the beginning of the month and throughout the entire course of the month, and in the same place and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is in those who, when they are in labor, become multiplied until it is necessary to extract the child by force; and among them those who are in severe pain have their face swell and become pale; and their collarbone; and among them those who are in pain have their face swell and become pale and dim and thin and dark in their limbs; and among them whose place is taken by the child; and among them whose tongue is multiplied; and among them whose mouth becomes swollen or their tongue hangs out and saliva flows from it, and among them whose sleep is multiplied, and among them who become sick in sleep, which is rougher and more acute than other pains.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when it happens in any cause of those, and truly if it is in the third or fourth month of the month, then you command that forceps be made to be passed every two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	When the windpipe of the neck is affected by gravity and descends into the chest, it is most likely an evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This wind is in the location of craniotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not necessary to use that which is from the complex humor of the chest, or in the quality of catarrh, for that great benefit.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it is not necessary to use those in the warts on the face, and in the heads of those who have poor health.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	I think that it is not necessary to continue on that, and therefore I advise the wind to pause its blow for a little while in the parts where you command, so that they do not fear the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Less ventilation of the alcohol is in the location of craniotomy of the dark vein and the basilar artery: and therefore it causes asthma, and the constriction of air and the division of the sternal angle of the air, and the throat, and the repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When the wind is blocked in the ear, and if it is left as is, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The wind of the cold humors causes pain in the face and throat, and migrates to the eyes, and causes headaches, and pains in the teeth; and it is in place of bodily cauterization of the bile ducts.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	When you command the wind to not press its hand, but to scarify, so that the artery does not insert and causes a rush of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The wind in the neck causes alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and a similarity to the diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in place of bodily cauterization of the external opening of the lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the wind that is made on the lips cause caphatan, which is made by the repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the wind that is made on the lips gives strength to the bodily cauterization of three veins, which are of the bile ducts, black and cephalic, so that those arteries supply all those veins with blood, and those small veins with blood from other veins that are largely entered when the attraction is on those three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	When the physician commands the surgeon not to proceed with a scarification, but to instead remove the flesh and nerves and arteries from the location.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	It is a breeze that blows over the thighs and calves, causing hemorrhoids and pus-filled ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And command the surgeon to make a large breeze, one that is of air, and that requires a deep incision; and then use many small breezes and perform a scarification in scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Many breezes are required for the manifestation of small changes, which reach the entire body, and alleviate old pains in the toes and heels, and in the vagina; and they provoke menstruation, and alleviate bothersomeness and distress; and they stand in location for flesh-cutting surgery on women's thighs, and calves, and on other parts.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	In the end, all of the body is deflated, and they make incisions in the flesh of men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the relief of the breezes is directed to the relief of the breezes in the thighs and calves.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position of the vents is that it pauses the vent in the beginning and continues until properly timed, and does not prolong the position of the vents, less pauses those slightly, and returns them to their original state, and that the humors arrive at the location through the advancement of the gullet.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	When you do not cease to apply this and continue to enter until you see the wound already swollen and inflamed, and the pain of the gallstone appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And you should carefully remove and repeat the small pieces a few times, and consider in the position of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Fourth, that person who has flesh of rare meats, cover that you remove a piece and not push it, so the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And order the wind to increase the cutting and spread a little, and then the removal is easier.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If in the wound it grows, you should cover that you remove several pieces, and in the first piece, you open the way of subtle incision to the wound and the clearness of the body.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	Less in the second by the examination of the obtained water from the removal of the large wound.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is very foul, you should make a deep cut in the last piece so that it can dry.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when you want to extract the wound little by little or a small piece, it is enough for us one cut.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If you wish to extract a hardened sinew, make an incision with a sharp cut; and if we find that the sinew is large, then cover the wound with stitches made with a suture.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "scarification" in which the depth of the cut is determined.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the skin is thick, hard, dark, and the wounds are large, then cover the wounds with poultices of olive oil, almond oil, or olive oil with cinnamon; if it is in the summer, use olive oil, olive oil for lavender, olive oil for chamomile, or olive oil for saffron, and follow those suggestions.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the surplus is large, remove it, and use olive oil that is dark, olive oil for balsam, olive oil for aloe, or olive oil for aneth, and follow those suggestions.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the ventilator is of large parts of fleshy tissue, then cover the wounds with poultices of oil, and follow these suggestions: make the locs of the ventilator as soft as possible, and if it is in the summer, use olive oil, olive oil for lavender, olive oil for chamomile, or olive oil for saffron, and follow those suggestions. If it is in winter, use olive oil, almond oil, or olive oil with cinnamon, and follow those suggestions.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	When that of which the sanctuary is gout, wash your nostrils with warm water, or with alcohol and vinegar, and it will be suitable for those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	When that of which the superfluities are fatty, wash your nostrils with warm water, or with alcohol and vinegar, which is called majorana, or with decoction of anise, or with camomile, and it will be suitable for them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And cover the nostrils with a cloth; there are some that are maintained in place by soaking them for an hour or for several hours, and some that sleep with the cloth on their nose.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done to prepare the nostrils before phlebotomy?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider that at the beginning: if the person who will perform the nasal device or who will perform phlebotomy has a hot temperament and feels agitated and inflamed, then you should take cold causes, such as milk vinegar, and place them on the agreeable and sweaty parts of the face, as well as on the neck and shoulders, and also on the cheeks.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	When they pause their walks as they can, and the servants of the vassals, and the tightened bands, and they seem to them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	Of that which is the cause of the collection, it is necessary to take in hand and pour on the belly or the belly of the scrotum, or the scrotum of the anus, and some sumac, and smell a strong odor between viel and noel; and that he be commanded to use little beer and food, and stop the walks of the patient's legs and canabir and pissers and small birds and columbine.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary to take care that in the day of ventozacio and fleubotomia the belly is greater than the walk.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary to give in the belly in some hours to Tyran homes tyriaca alpharac, or medicaments of muscle, so that the muscle is not damaged, or by the ventozacio or by fleubotomia or prop, so that the main members be comfortable and that the wound be subdued; and it does not matter if they take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	When the wounds that were made are windwaxes that have paused their flesh, and over the shoulder and gout, and the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the thigh, these members did not suffer scarification on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for that attraction of the member, as if they pause windwaxes over the breast in the flow of the sacred sac of the navel; and they use that way which is dissolved windwaxes free from the member, as if they pause over the belly and the umbilicus; then that rarefied member and scalp it and ram it down the pain that resolves windwax.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And if they have paused over the buttocks when they happened in their impurity or dryness, then by virtue of strong attraction for the beautiful ass and eradicate the dryness from that place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And apparently, when they have paused over the foot and the shoulder windwaxes are needed in those closed ones.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these windwaxes are administered with great care, and some are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	When some waters are administered full of water in the meals of the mares.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And it is because the wind is filled and is pushed out and is water alone or water in which certain herbs are convenient for water.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The form of the ventage administered in the face: it is the width of the orifice of two thirds, according to what we have formed; and the quantity of the preon is the greatest of a palm; and it is in the lower part of the head, in the location where it is in the circuit, the thickness of the head, the traunc is small second according to the quantity that enters into the head a drop.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is necessary that the pain of the ear be caused by hot or bitter things, with large margins, lion, and thick perse, such that it does not lead the member to its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if at the side of the meal of the earring or of iron, where candle is placed over the fire,
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this wind is greater than that which has been recommended; and the little more of that according to the meals and the state of that who uses it from that.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	When the winds of the falangs and extinguished others than those of the young men and large bellies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of pausing this draught is that it extends the heat of the wooden fire gently, and then places it on the vertex of the thigh transverse in the thigh's location of the draught, so that the fire is lit around the area to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And if it is placed on the member of the patient, and it is said that it is over the wounds, then when you have the draughts and do not indicate that they are over and that the vapor is on that wound, then the draught will be too dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then you light the fire according to your own will, and if you indicate that you have done so, then do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	The fewer the draughts that are administered to the patient of pleurisy, the better, in water, where there is no transverse and vertex, and it is only filled with water, and is placed on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the form of the draught: And this draught, the more it is large, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	The text you provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	This line seems to be discussing the administration of bloodletting in certain body parts. It states that bloodletting is only performed on members where there is no possibility of positioning fans (or perhaps "winds" as referred to in the original text), due to the smallness of those members. It then mentions that it can be done on denuded skin, such as the nose, where it may resemble the semblantz (a term that could refer to a type of wound or scar).
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	When it comes to the quality of using those that if you have found bloody discharges in the wounds of cleansed wounds,
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	When the patient is in bed, lying on their back, and feels hungry but has no cause for it in their stomach, and their belly is evacuated through the abdominal incision and the vent, and their thighs are flayed as they lie down, and their hands are placed over them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are swollen and the case is clear.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the area with wind, it will be less painful in the future.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Otherwise, wash the area with water that is agreeable and moves easily; and it should be flayed and expressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the stomach of the patient is prolonged and the pain from the blood clots remains, then you should put a damp cloth in water and place it over the area until the congealed part is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the patient's stomach multiplies, you should powder vitriol or similar substances on the affected part before it ruptures; or their hands are placed over the area with the nails of the fingers that have been separated from the location, and the hand is laid down when the fingers adhere to the location, and the stomach ruptures.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	If necessary, perform bloodletting, if it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then do flay the location with a sharp object or insert a needle into the areas that are most sensitive to pain; and place your hand there, taking those when you feel any pain.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want to close, powder a little of aloe vera, salt, or charcoal, and close as much as possible.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Now begins the treatment of the third part: from restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is vital in the art of medicine; and it deals with the restoration of broken and accidentally dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, I advise you to study this chapter with caution, with the ignorance of the ancients and those who do not care about the freedom of the ancients and read only one letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason this manuscript of the scientists in our land is private; and you have not been obliged to do so at any time; and I have not admitted that afterwards, except by long study of the books of the ancients and understanding of those, within which I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And accordingly direct yourself to experiments and studies in the course of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Capitol primier.	The first source sentence is not provided in the text you've given.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	The first source sentence in the provided text is: "Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	This is the first source sentence to translate:
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	The text is discussing the treatment of various types of injuries or dislocations in the body, specifically focusing on the feet and intestines. Here's a line-by-line translation:
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And if the patient's stomach is empty of herbs and meat and vegetables, and I forbid fatty meat and overeating of food that fills the veins of the sinews, then it is safe to take cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	When you return the patient's thighs to their original position, it is customary in this first course of treatment.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	When the patient begins to feel better, it is important that the thighs are not covered with innutritious foods such as those rich in viscosity, such as wheat bread soaked in water, and beans, and peas, and pork rinds, and cheese, and fresh fruits, and vegetables, and eggs, and honey. In this first course of treatment, coagulation of the fracture is achieved with a mixture of wheat bread soaked in water and honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	You know that bones become brittle in men and the elderly, and it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated by nature alone due to the dehydration of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are consolidated and continued over time due to the dehydration of their limbs, and those that continue and become solid in the end are similar to the bones of small animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	May nature adjust and envelop over the cut bones of any part, seeming like glue, which increases and strengthens that which adheres and contracts within it, which is conglutinated and linked, within which the fever and weakness of the body are brought, as if a fire at the beginning, within which no cause prohibits this from being one of its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to place the cushions of the thighs, which are heavy and viscous and large, as they have been said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Different types of fracture depend on the part of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you know that the types of fractures are different depending on the part of the body; a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the head; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the shoulder; and it seems that all other bones are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you remember the entire type of fracture, explained in the distinct part of the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The given text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The diversity of fractures in the bones is noted; there is a curved fracture and another that occurs in the head; some are fractures according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the ribs and pelvis and other parts are produced and not produced, as it is written in the pen when prepared to write, and a fracture and dislocation in the head, and a fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for all the species, it is engaged or tormented in the restoration of the bone according to what was remembered in its distinct location.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Much pain from bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	Therefore, bone fracture is known: it is stiffness of the bone, and of that prominence, and perceived by the sense, and so when you understand that am with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is not stiffness of the bone apparent and not pain, you must touch with your hand when you touch the bone in movement and the thigh does not increase much pain, then there is no fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	The text describes a medical procedure where a tortuosity or small fissure in the body may be treated with cauterization, compression, and possibly medication. The specific medicine used is not mentioned. The procedure is performed on the affected area, and a stricture (narrowing) of the vessel may occur as part of the treatment.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The text suggests that there is a location where the arc (curve) does not split into two or another part, and no accidents occur in its passage through the entire part of the body. If there are any deviations from the normal course, it is necessary to correct them immediately, as they may lead to gout.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If gout occurs, it is necessary to treat it for several days until the gout ceases. Then, remove that second hand that you can lift and engage with your other hand.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The text suggests that the restoration of the affected part and the engagement of the second hand is done with a substance that comes from the bone where the accident occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then, hold that second hand that will be remembered by the rememoration of the accident.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the bones of the knee are sagged, then you need to extend this cut member of two parts, if it is the thigh or the foot; or if the bone is small; or if several cords or one cord and the bone.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And if your position is that you hold the member in its place while it is being extended according to its natural figure, and if the parts of the member are stretched, then you must know how to return those tendons to their original positions one by one, as you can do in each of them.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And pay attention to your direction so that you do not hurt the patient's thigh with your operation or injury; and apply yourself to the second bone that is next to the other in better forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And at that time profitably touch your member with your hand, and if sometimes you find something different, correct it and straighten it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And equally vehement extension and compression are needed, as if they were words made by idle hands that observed movements made by their own hands, or as if they were made by the contraction of the member, as they have seen in the operation of their own movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	When the quality of the stricture of the quiet member is that which you recommend, because you know that different members are cut in their appearance and size and shape according to their type.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and says it is thin and resembles those, you should know that the covering is of a fine silk.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Few are those that have large members like the thigh or the chest, and they know that in those there is an envelope made of lace and hard, which the ligament connects the large member to the whole part of the stricture, in which there is no macula.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And when you begin, place your evacuation of equilibrium conveniently at that, over the location of that fracture in three or four layers of that member's membrane; and tighten your grip on a small part of the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And see if that is at the end of the pus point of the location of the fracture, and tighten your grip on a part that does not focus your stricture on the place of the fracture you have strengthened.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	When you have extended your hand a little into the location of the fracture and gradually soften the stricture, one by one, as you take hold of the location with a large part of your hand.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then, take another tool and wrap the other hand around it over the location that you have covered with your first hand, and see if the envelopes at the edge further from the fracture; and this is your operation in the stricture of the envelope and in the softening of the second one that they have said in the first envelope.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then, stop between the feathers of a lion or a cloak of the kind that covers the tortuosity of the fracture, if in it there is tortuosity; and if not, do not stop in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then, stop on the other tool, and cover these envelopes gently as much as possible, if in the location there is no inflammation or post-cautery pain, and you should stop on it that causes the post-cautery pain and that also relieves the inflammation; and then leave it for a while; and you should hold on to it with your hands.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	Here comes the first source sentence to translate:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	The first source sentence to translate is: "However, the splint that is placed over that fracture should be thick and have a small one on the other fractures, and the length of the splint should be according to the member's size and thickness; and apply pressure on the splints as another bandage according to your first stricture; and make sure the bandage is gently according to what has been said about the stricture, and that it is your stricture according to the location of the fracture, and as the fracture lengthens, the stricture becomes tighter.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	When the sons are large and coarse in their features and appearance, and they are few in number; and if the sons are large, then as you have seen in the operation of another doctor who stopped the threads while passing the sons of cords of the tort, and it is a great error when too much stricture is equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And if the sons are too small and not suitable, then you will not be able to recognize them for stricture, and there is no need for one to be between another.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the thighs are cut off by the ends of the stones at the stricture in those places, then you should pause there for a while, whether it is with leopard skin or wool, which does not cause injury to that part.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some visible fractures are caused, and there are disruptions in the chain, and you will find in that part of the capital a singular incident.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you know that all members are not straight in the first day; the cause is that the member, when it is large, does not come to rest on the stool for a few days or seven or more, according to your safety from the occurrence of cauterization.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the tool used by ancients for the splints they mended, which were placed over fractures and dislocations, as well as twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The splint, as repaired by ancient restorations, is convenient for complex and particularly for the thighs and buttocks, where it is placed without heat or pressure: and that is because you take powder from the flour, and the bone of the flour which you must make the movement of the mold in the sides of the flour.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And how that feels, but it is crucial that the album of the hoo does not cause discomfort or roughness, and instead uses that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another splint for fractures and dislocations: recipe of asafetida, of ladanum, of acacia, of unguent, and migrach, which is made of milk salvage, of all dracs. x; of melted butter and aloe of drac. v; alochil of drac. xx; all the parts and joints and crackles and cribellates if the complexion of the thigh is scalped; and uses this splint, which has a good composition and restores the fractured bones gently, and confers peace to the homes.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	This appears to be a recipe for a plaster or ointment used to alleviate pain from fractures and twists. Here's a possible translation:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	1. All of them are divided into thirteen parts in a mortar made of mottled earth, and they are polished, and they are refined with water or albumin of hooves and are administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	When treating joint pain and separating bones from their locations, and addressing pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: Take a clean cloth and dip it in cold water with oil of wormwood, and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, this ointment is not suitable for restoration, but rather for reducing inflammation and expelling pain immediately.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another ointment for repairing cuts: take some fig tree oil and poppy seed oil; mix them together and make a ointment with them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A ointment for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the inflammation of apopathy: mix together aloe, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of ers, all parts of the plant, and all parts are to be taken and applied, unless the member is scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	However, if the member is scalded, then cool it with water or cold water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another ointment for quick relief that this first one does not provide when severe apopathy occurs and the member needs to be restored: mix together aloe, semen of li, balsam, mallow, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all parts of the plant, and all parts are to be taken and applied, with water or cold water, depending on the quality of the member and the color of the skin.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	This is a medieval medical treatise written in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The text discusses various medical procedures and treatments. Here's the translation of the first source sentence:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	In the region of Gualia, it was observed that there were cushions over the member torn from its restoration and the causes in which it dried out due to lack of heat, as well as resemblance to those causes that have been recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Making a plaster that soothes injury and pain: recipe made of wax, feathers, hairs of swine or piglet, and aloe vera, and salt, divided into equal parts; they are pressed and rubbed, and the plaster is applied.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	In the amount second to that which covers the limb, it is considered if there is no pain, no excitement, and the bone is not broken, then it is not necessary to remove the dressing from that place. However, if you consider that there is pain, excitement, or the bone is broken, then you must remove the dressing from that place.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain or excitement is felt at the location, then you must quickly remove it or cut it off, and take away the plaster from there.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take some of the patient's sweat and wet sea water, and submerge it in warm water, and let it lave the place where the pain and excitement cease; and then wrap the member with a piece of cloth that has been soaked in warm water; and put on the linen that is submerged in vinegar and olive oil, and wrap it around the member; and make sure there is no allergic reaction to the cautery, and that the inflammation of the member has subsided, and the pain will be relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If ever the testicle or the scrotum becomes inflamed and painful, and all other symptoms are similar to this, and you are advised to apply a plaster and constrict it, then do as you have done at the beginning of the incision.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If no harm occurs to the member from any of those causes that have been said, then do not remove it for less than three days or four or seven; and some heal completely in twenty days after you have removed it, as they have said, as soon as the fracture has healed, and it settles into the coagulation of the flesh over that.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And adjust the constriction less than in your first tightening, and reduce the swelling of the patient's thigh, according to what is preceded by the remorse of the pain.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If ever the place of the fracture has dried and become less extensive than before, you should know that this nutrient is forbidden to reach that; and therefore, embrocate that with whey from all parts that were on that, and it will be completely cured in three days; and then tighten the constriction a little, and for this operation feed the member with nutrients, and it becomes healthy.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When a doctor performs a reduction for a fracture of another limb that was not reduced at the beginning, if it is covered, and is subsequently reduced according to the tortuosity, it is an error in the operation of their hands, and there is great fear, and if it is done correctly, the Antics will be in their proper places and will feel good about the work done by the doctor.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	When I have not seen any of them perform this, it is reasonable that they do not know how to do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The kinds of fractures are blows, and their figures are various, and their causes are distinct: four types of fractures one is caused by percussion of the skull, and the percussion comes from all the bones entering into the cranium, which we remove from the skull as we do in the shoulder, and for this reason this kind is called decompression; or the bone pierces a part of the bone, and pierces the flesh and does not pass through the piercing to the other side; and this kind of fracture is called complete separation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these kinds of fractures is great or little, and of fractures that are caused or spontaneous; and the cause of them is percussion or burning over the bone, and they seem to be like this.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is called penetrating that has been brought near to the plateau which we remove from the skull; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these kinds of fractures is great or little.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	When a fracture occurs in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair petite, and therefore this special capillary fracture is called.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This is a fracture that is caused by compression or percussion of the bone and appears to be, which enters any layer of the bone in the parts of the fingers, and is caused in the concave location as accidences of the payroles of eram when they are subjected to percussion and are parted from their parts of the fingers.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is truly caused in the bones of the human humors, as those that are like caps of eggs.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these species of fractures are separated by parts as stars are separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will find am reremoracio of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And all these species of fractures can be detected by detection over those and by inquiry into their attempts and other parts of rotten flesh that are on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a special capillary is identified by what is discovered on the bone, and it is removed, and it is limited on the attempt of the part, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture, at the beginning are considered the accidents of the leg, and you should pay attention to the accidents that signify by their meaning over the patient, such as vomiting of color, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of vote, and sincopi, and acute fever, and edema of the extremities, and signs similar to those in more serious cases, and the doctor's treatment is not effective.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you ever encounter an unexpected situation, you should begin the patient's treatment immediately.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause of this problem is that it came to you with the symptoms as they were and has been getting worse over the past few days, so you should study the bone of the leg on the day of the 14th day in the first position.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, you should study that you sit on the bone of the leg on the 7th day, having to do with whether the bone is corrupted by the panniculus and that accidents may occur that have been reported.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain, and it is divided into small parts and torn apart, you should study that the division is contaminated and torn, according to what you have recommended to me.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And is that you examine the foot of the patient who is suffering, and uncover the bone according to the usual method and carefully after the figure of the disease, and that it be less about the foot.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you have an accident in the bone, you must detect the flow of blood or aphosis caut, and you should oppose it to what you have covered, and it is that you put infusions of draps in the vein and olive oil on the rose, and you must stop the disease entering when it is sedated by the aphosis, and you are sure of the flow of blood; and you should start in the circuit of the bone and in the ablation of the.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; and this is the form of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	When the surgeon has prepared the incision site, he should use the second instrument.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	You need several types of scalpels, each with a different width and edge; and their edges should be sharp and pointed at the end, and they can be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	Use them with ease by striking them on the scalpel to avoid damaging the head and causing pain.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are hard and thick, it is best to make small incisions along the course of the tendon before administering the scalpels, which are called non-penetrating tarsals.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	I do not name them otherwise but four, those that do not stop at the end of the bone, for if they touch the test, they can cause pain and make the head of the nail resemble a small circle or margin, which is forbidden to be submerged and to pass through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is best to choose a large number of these tarsals that are suitable for the spine of each bone, as long as the head of the extremity is sharp and agile, and the quantity in length and brevity is second to the quantity of spine of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three kinds of teravels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the cut bone is that you place the teravel on the bone and revolve it around that as you know if the bone has already been penetrated; and then pause the teravel at another location, and place it there where it enters the entire amount of the grosseza of the ray or envelops it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	When it comes to cutting into the bone that is between any joint of the bone, and making a small hole that you can use to apply pressure to prevent it from moving, as they have said, entering if you radiate the bone, or am your own hand, or am another cause for those sturments which would appear at that place, as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be sure to guard that you do not touch any cause of the cipher with the knife.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have perforated the bone with the knife and separated it from the cipher if continued on it, and extracted it, be sure that you do not cut or crush that in the hardness of the bone that is in the bone with another tool such as a knife, but rather make sure that you use a small hole and a small point like the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if you encounter any part of the small bones and fragments, hold it at that point that you must do for the sturments; and there treat the infection of the liver and find out which ones have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other hand of the operation is longer, about four feet long, which Galiardus describes and praises greatly; and this is the saying of the doctor: it is necessary for you at the beginning to discover the part where the bone of the location ends and the fracture is severe and manifest, when you will have discovered that part and will then place your hand further down at the end of this slow and gentle inscissori of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	E es that the lenticular part is like a lion and does not cause any cause, and the acute part is in two latz avantz in length, as times; that the lenticular part should be adjusted to the cipher am the face of the acute part on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E aprop percuteys about the inscissori of a partida am a little malhet when all the bones are identified as easily as they revolve, and you should be sure of the pantoon that does not happen in the accident that you fear in this hand, and if the doctor14 was the fol of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleepy.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When something causes pain in the bone of the ankle in certain places of the bone, it will be noted that this is due to the doctor's intervention in the lenticular part of the ankle joint, and it will be easier to remove that which causes the harm and the pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the fracture does not penetrate into the ankle joint, and that which is separated or remains in the bone is the face of the bone, and there are sharp and subtle roughness on it, you can recognize that asperity and eradicate those subtle roughnesses with sharp razors according to the number you have prepared for various quantities so that you can possibly administer those in all places with convenient pus and the pus of the second part after you lose your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And recognize that you administer in your razor with the one that cuts the bone at the beginning with the latent pus of those razors, and use a part of the subtle pus of the bone, and do not stop giving until you reach the continuity of the pus and the subtle pus of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	When in any of the smaller fractures or subtle breaks, follow the treatment you used for the one you lost in the correction of the bone.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because not all have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And based on that, they have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus is tight when you reduce the bone, then cover your hand with the next piece of cloth, submerge it in hot oil, and place it over the wound; and take another folded or tripled piece of cloth, submerge it in hot oil, and place it over the first one, and apply it to the part where you can without pressing on the bone, not too tightly; and administer to that limb, and do not strain it only by the amount of the plague.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And keep that to this cure for a day or two after you are sure of the stitch; and remove it and administer medicines as needed for superfluous dryness, such as linen and flour of errors, powder of ensember and aristogony, and decoctions of those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	It is necessary to make these powders from this powder and spread them over the skin, as they should be dry; and generally, they are administered in the entire medicine of the property of which it does not cause harm or toxicity.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And keep in mind that the plague in your cure is not net; and it should not be in its surdity of engaging or another; nor should virulence be added to it; for when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, corrupts that and pours on the thigh, and causes damage to the malignant evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And damages in the crown of the head, as the skull is shaped by the bones and most importantly when the cure of the head is administered, and darkens on its surface; and therefore consider that if damages are found in the thigh, you know that it is due to all its parts.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if there is no darkening but from the medicine that was placed on top, and it is in the virtue of that medicine that causes the darkening, you should know that you take from honey a part and red oil parts iii, and apply those over the crown; and administer that to the curandum with the specifics of the cure that are suitable for when it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	I apologize, but there seems to be no text provided for
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	This line translates to "Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not divided by bones but by soft tissue partitions, or one of those certain veins, according to which in you there are two bones, and the partition of the end is cartilaginous, and is not divided, nor does it cause pain in you, except for tightness and tortuosity and insufficiency.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the soft tissue partitions of your nose is broken, you should know that you insert the small instrument into the affected part of the nose and close the fracture at the top of the indicated point, and at the deformed point, return the nose to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And it is done by you for ease, and keep in mind that you do not close for that operation on the thighs of them.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper partition of the nose and it does not pass through it, you should know that it should be equal at its extremity.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the fracture is in several parts, you should make it appear like that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And I advise you of the restoration of the nose in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and otherwise, know that you need to cut the nail of the middle finger an eighth of an inch and reattach the cauterized part.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	When entering the end of the nose, a cloth is inserted into it, if the fracture is in one piece, or threads are sewn, if the fracture is in several pieces, and as much as possible is sewn to fill the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	In ancient restoration methods, the bones were wrapped in linen and moved throughout the day, but I have not seen this for myself; having heard that the cloth is wrapped in a layer of powder like flour; and then it is placed inside when the bone is fixed and the cartilage is endurable.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some people have something inside the nose, instead of a gauze, because it is wrapped in a piece of leather; and this is because you have fractured the nasal bone with great force, and the throat is not restricted for breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do so, and if you wish, make gauzes.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another gauze is pushed into the nose, apply it to the nostril or the corner of the mouth, or apply it with a damp cloth, or apply it with a wet cloth.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If there is no occurrence of strabismus, then you should cover that deformed part with flour and powdered essence of ensel, and place your hand over the affected area, and do not lie on it for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken or fractured, then you should cut through them, and take out those parts that are suitable for those; and then close the incision, and care for that part with what is appropriate for that, and apply plasters that are convenient for that.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is an abscess in the nose, then you should cut that part and care for it with what is appropriate for that, and administer intravenous solutions of water throughout as much as possible.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not infected, observe if the fracture is deformed only, and is not cut into two parts and is curved in the parts of the teeth, then your diagnosis is correct.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	If the fracture is in the lateral part of the leg, then you should introduce the left indicator into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is in the medial part of the mandible, then you should introduce the right indicator into the mouth of the patient; and gently press on that to facilitate the healing of the fracture parts, which are adjacent to your other hand's part of the bone; that is, it is equal to those.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the mandible fracture has already been separated into parts, then you should cover that you are administering extensions of parts in a straight line as soon as possible to achieve alignment.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you have an accident that disrupts the teeth, then you should strengthen those of which you suspect are made of gold or silver or lead; and place your hand on the disrupted mandible, and place your hand on the double drap, and place your hand on the large gaping wound decently far from the mandible, or a piece of cloth tied at the length of the mandible, according to what you have prepared for the application, before it is destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	When the physician commands the patient to rest and be quiet, and to stop eating the foods that cause lethargy.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you suspect that the figure has changed in any way, then you should touch it and observe it on the third day; and if you find that the change is different from what was expected, you should correct it with powder of molybdenum, album of horse, or flour of cinnamon, which you had used on the spot where the wound was, and stop over the leopard's skin.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then apply and adjust the plaster to the wound, and do not change the position of the bone, and leave that until it is healed and strongens the fracture; four weeks later this fracture will be strained.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If another accidental wound occurs, then you should administer the medicine that has been given in the past to heal the wound, and keep that wound from being infected again.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is infected, then you should consider if it is the bone that is separated or the soft tissue, and you should carefully examine those soft tissues to see what is best for them in the removal of those from the sturments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the wound of the plague is straight, you should enlarge it as much as possible according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	When you have finished stitching those wounds, and if they are not too large, then you can continue to the plague; otherwise, rest on one of the plasters that is suitable for this wound and covers it, so that when it is healed, you can remove it.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v. is not a complete sentence or phrase,
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	If the clavicle is broken in a direction opposite to the muscle, and this fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it is cut or separated, or if it is separated into two parts that do not have wounds, and this is easier to restore; or if it happens in the wounds, and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is due to the plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is due to the plague, is that you must have two assistants, so that one holds the auxiliary and follows the cut clavicle, and the other extends the col to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	When the fracture is approached by the thighs, it is said that it is in the form of the second one, and it is not in its eminence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you ask for extension, it is necessary to have the thighs apart, using a cloth or wool pad, and it depends on the amount of your need; extend and lift the clavicle and stretch the cloth over the fissure that is in front of the fracture according to its form.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot pull the end of the clavicle to the desired position, it is because it has been bent at the shoulder; then make the thigh be bent over the shoulder, and place your hand on the muscle of the leg a coyssi larger in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The surgeon presses the muscle of the leg at the desired position, and if the furculum bone is elevated as it was in the preon, then correct the fracture and place it according to the thighs that you have.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel pain from the clavicle and muscles, it is necessary to press on that area and remove those pains as much as possible.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is held in the bone, then you must make an incision in the skin of this one with one of the knives that you have already sharpened, because you have paused further back from the sternum that serves as the cipher; and the sternum is made of flint or iron, and this is the form of this one.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	It seems to be the appearance of the cook, and this is the cavity of it; and its latitude should be according to this one that you need for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of it should be according to what you can possibly achieve in the operation; that there are extremities assisting as many times as possible, and one extremity will be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the plague that you have incised when you extracted the fat from the bone is wide, and it is certain of apoplexy, then you must adjust the lips of the plague with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear apoplexy, then you must fill the plague with cloths and powders according to the amount of the cut in the plague.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If a stroke occurs with cauterization, it is known that the skin turns red and becomes inflamed, and then it is placed on that spot.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	If the stricture of the bone is caused by plague and division, it is known that it is covered with a plaster made of flour from the albumen of eggs, and placed on the prominence of the leon, and then the string of the titillus is placed around the end of the bone, if you ask for that, and then you keep it wet, so that the Sarrazis, which is a long and thin one, and the length of the bone is like a palm or nearby, and then a powder of double plaster is placed on the prominence and the plaster; and then a small tabletop is placed on it, of which the thickness is three inches and the length is similarly approximately; and then it is wrapped around the injury, and then the drap is wrapped around the tabletop, and then the drap is wrapped around the tabletop with the stela on top of the injury, and then it is wet as it is turned, and then it is turned over the collar of the bone and the end of the malaute, and then it is reduced to that part, and sometimes when the stricture of the fracture is below the stricture, it is known that it is not hidden under you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	E tot, that no be harm the pelvic bone; and for this reason that you see the labor each day, that when the limb is softened or when you have already made the pelvis more prominent, then you correct this and strengthen the ligament.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then pause the patient's sleep on the chest of the patient, and pause further the pillow of the patient so that he/she can sleep comfortably on the pillow; for if it is elevated the assistant's hand of the patient on the neck of that one, and thus the fracture of the shoulder is raised to the level of the muscle; or if the arm of the patient is placed at the collarbone of that one.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not cut the tendon if it does not happen in the proper or accidental place, and enter within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And if you have seen the face of the patient and it is appropriate, adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave when it is restored and the fracture of the shoulder is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable in the month of twenty-eight days, and some are seen in other men's time in that month.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A spatula is cut in the place of the chest and not cut except for the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	When you cut the bone of the patient — and it is cut in the middle of the bone — and it is not recognized unless touched, then you should follow what the figure of the forced fracture tells you to prepare for the reduction and reduce that second figure to its natural position in the entire framework of the joint that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then pause over the powder of fine albumen of blood and honey; and then pause on a double drap; and then pause on the table surface according to the quantity of the spatula either totally or a little less.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the table is concave in the corners of the locations of the spatula, then you should engage that concavity with a leopard's tooth and allow the table to be equal.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then stretch as much as possible with wet long hair under the constraint of the table and between which there is not a tight spot of the place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the limb in every day; and all watched that is softened, another watched and stretch the leg and make the table equal if it is tight of the place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When the patient's leg is placed over the table, it means that the patient's leg is positioned so that one end is on the table and the other end is
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	After twenty days or twenty-five days, the spatula is restored.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Then, when this number is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and you know certainly that it is of the bones from which the beginning was not confused nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the location of the knee joint and clean the area with a wet cloth, then you divide it over it, take it out, and follow what has been said in the fracture of the femur of sadacio de apostema caut if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The chest some ribs are broken in the middle of the body and then bent; rather, the ends of the ribs that are not chipped and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents that occur when the rib is cut, it goes to the parts of the fingers and causes great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, and heavy vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the cut bone and not hidden in the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The first source sentence to translate is:
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place your hand over the plaster and stop, and stop pressing on the table's subtle surface of sauce or cilium and as it pleases in levitation, push that into the cloth; and then gently place your hand on the cut bone that is not rotten; and go along the ridge at the back of some veins, and tighten that restriction nicely; and consider the ridge throughout the hour, and when it is softened, tighten that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to provoke decay or pricking, pain, or apoplexy that occurs in that place, then cut and remove that and erase the plaster and correct what happens by the hand of curing; and reduce the plaster, sometimes to the face; and adjust the restriction within that is healthy.
Capitol .viii.	Capital. Eighth.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of restoration of the breasts when they are lacerated.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a break of the breasts does not happen except in large locations where they are pulled by both sides; and from the ends of them, at the parting, it does not occur in those contractions but rather through those which have cartilage.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	When I recognize that the patient is not afraid of the feeling of the investigation by the doctor,
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The restoration should be as follows as to bind the fracture with the third finger possible, entering that it is covered by the flesh, and then apply and press and tighten the broken bone to the splint if directed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is inclined towards the dentists' teeth, you will experience severe pain and puncture, as if pierced by a needle that has been squeezed, and for this to alleviate the difficulty in coughing, and throat pain, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the antidotes are already engineered in that way.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And they say that by covering with the flesh those vaginas of the thighs that generate inflammation and viscera, so that the belly is flattened and extended, and the fracture is driven to the parts that are deviated.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We might have this for that reason not to cause any harm in generating cauterization, if it does not happen; and if it does happen, you can help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they advised those who had paused due to wind and instead that some strength was needed; and it seemed like reasoning, but rather it is feared that the wind will direct its excess to the location due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They advised them: cover that place with wool that has already been immersed in oil, and they should place powders between the backs when it is filled, which is the liaison that engulfs when it rolls around the second retraction; and they should properly care for the patient with food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	If the patient suffers from severe constriction and the doctors puncture the membrane, be careful with the patient, cover that place with something, discover the torn cost, and then put down the instrument that preserves the cipher, the remembrance of which precedes, and remove the bones easily, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And if you adjust the lips of the plague, if it is large, apply ointment, and care for it with that when it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you have an apoplexy, place your hand and pour powders into oil that is rose-colored and place over the area, and care for the patient with this so that it can be cured of the apoplexy.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	When a person is lying down on the bed where they sleep, if they are ill, then it is necessary to take their pulse.
Capitol .ix.	In the case of a fever, it is customary to make
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of fractures of the spine of the two and of the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some cracks in the bones of the neck, and they turn towards the inside, and seemingly towards the spine of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when you want to know if it is sick or not, consider that if you see the joints more softened and stupefied and dead and cannot make them move or extend or tighten them and when you press them with your fingers or puncture them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not sick, and in the cases of dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel pain in the joints with your fingers or puncture, then you know that the nucleus of the bone is safe and that the illness does not need much care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spines of the neck resemble that and want to know if it is sick or not, consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that the pain has subsided, it is appropriate to apply the remedy that has been applied to those who have suffered from gout in the past, and when you touch the patient's shoulder, you will notice ventilation and perspiration of their body, and some veins are turned over on their shoulder and cannot urinate, you should know that it is fatal, and therefore not include it in the treatment of the patient.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If you do not find any cause for those, the cause is better and will provide relief.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment of the patient is that you perforate at the seat of the acupuncture point that you place over the spine that is red or pink, or if it is hot; pause there for a while until the acupuncture point is sedated, and then some veins will open in the day that has passed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then pause one of the comforting plasters and exsits, and press on that with your hand; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not sleep on the part where pain occurs when it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If pain occurs, you must cover the sacrum or any cause that has been separated from it, and hold that os; and then adjust the lips of the plague, if it is large, with a sutura; and then treat that am alcu encarnatiu of the enguentz, when it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the hip bone is cut, and the end of the thigh, you should cover that you enter the point of the left thigh in the anus, and tighten the cut bones with the other thigh as possible; and place your hand on the plaster and staple, if you need those, and stretch that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel cuts on that, you should put your hand over it, and remove that, and care for the wound with the following treatment before it is healed when it is cured.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of restoring the waist.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the hips are so cut, and if they are cut, their fracture is not only a communication at the ends thereof and are inserted in the longitudinal and declining in the parts of the dentitions; and it causes pain in the buttocks and location and puncture, and the cushion is stunned when the fracture occurs.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it when it is over the fracture that is the figure of the hand.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is at the end of the limb, simply, you should cover that second part with something that fits well and is adapted to the shape of your body.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the lower leg or thigh, you should place the cushion on the patient's abdomen, entering it if it is prepared for your restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have covered that part, place something over the plaster, and place something over that piece of plaster or nail, and tighten it so that you do not fear puncture of the fracture or removal of the staple.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And cover the concavity as much as it holds that inside which presses the tightening on the other side, and command the abdomen to lie over the side or to uncover the opposite side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If you accidentally cause cauterization, stop extending and treating the area until the cauterization is sated, and place something over it that is followed by that second part that precedes; and then return to the restoration of the patient and tighten that part as much as possible.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If it happens that the bones are cracked or broken, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of restoring the fracture of the helper.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Helper is that which is between the thigh and into the shoulder of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, you should restore the helper in one of two hands, among which the one that you hold is the one that has the most similar shape to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	 And they are connected by two cords, and it is suspended from an elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the leg over a bench; and it is placed outside the broken arm over the end that has come to the head of the leg in the location where the curve of the end is attached to the curvature of the fist.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And it is suspended over that cause, or the minister extends it to the parts outside; and the cauterizer and the fracture are in the same parts, if the fracture returns according to what is covered.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other hand is that it is placed over the cervical part and suspends the head of the arm with the cord of the leg; and it commands two ministers, one of whom holds that the fracture is broken in the parts most affected, and the other holds the elbow away from it; and they extend their part to their location.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the extension to be pushed out, then apply pressure over the fracture of the limb and over the other limb, and thus extend the two parts of the limbs.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	If the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then make sure that the other end of the limb is supported on the thigh and the other part of the fracture is held in place with a bandage.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If the fracture is close to the knee, then make sure that the limb is supported on that location and on the other part of the limb.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Tie the bandage as tightly as possible and adjust it according to the part that is covered and applied in a good way, then apply pressure if necessary to prevent hematoma cauterization.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If hematoma cauterization occurs, remove the bandage after seven days and place it back over the wet and red lana sutura that was applied before the hematoma occurred, then apply pressure.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The tool for applying pressure to the fracture is that you place plaster over the fracture and then wrap it with drap nau; then adjust the arm on the helper, and hold your hand on the inner side of the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	You should pause the cloth and press on the assistant's arms so that the arm is in the right position, unless there is any cause for the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And use belts.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you should press on the fracture with that belt that is placed at the top and bottom of it, and between each belt, the latitude of the same, and its length according to the trenching added by three parts of the total part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And press on the belts at the stricture that I said at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And your stricture at the location of the fracture should be straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when you stretch the fracture, it is the smaller stricture.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And if you sometimes consider the situation of the belts and the stricture as they have said in the hour when you restore the member to its usual position, then you should do that.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear apoplexy cauterization, then press the stricture and place the belts in the day that has been said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the limb for three days in total, so that it does not happen in the site of inflammation or swelling; or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to the superfluity of stricture; and then correct everything according to what has been said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are over concerned that there is no cause for this, do not let the ligament drip for more than three days or less.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And if his sleep is over the thighs, and the thighs are more over the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand over the complete lacing of wool engagement, and consider in all hours of the night or day that the figure of the cut member is not delayed or dissolved, or that the limb is softened, therefore correct everything according to your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the food of the patient according to the order that has been given, in such a way that the food is gentle at the beginning and becomes more rigid as it is swallowed; and you cover that the food of the patient is increased.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Fourthly, it is customary for the assistant and the patient's bed to be strong for forty days; and you cover that they are relaxed and are administered baths and medicines as those correct those.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is long and narrow, you should not delay in applying the splint within a day or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus; of these, one is small and the other is the one that rises up, and the other is large and the one that holds it from the small one from the beginning.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger humerus is only slightly cut, or the smaller one, and they are not broken, it is not necessary to intervene.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And if the smaller humerus is cut, you must restore the displacement of the elbow and the care of the patient is placed in someone else's hands.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And if the larger humerus is broken, the restoration of the displacement of the elbow is difficult and the care of the patient is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And it is difficult when the bones are only slightly cut.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is cut is the smaller humerus, it is convenient to consult the surgeon, and the restoration of the displacement of the elbow must be done with small extensions, as much as possible, until it is no longer engaged.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the large fatty tissue is tight, then you should cover it with a wide cloth and apply a strong pressure.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If both fatty tissues are tight, then you should cover them with a wide cloth and apply a strong pressure to the area where the pain is located.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And cover the figure of the face with the restoration of the swelling and the extension of the stretched part over a cushion, and place the fingers of the face in the parts that others say, and the ear should be placed below the other words, and the thigh should be placed on a pillow.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if there is a cushion under the leg to support it and prevent the thigh from becoming too tight.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And if the doctor extends the arm of the part that is pushed away from the shoulder or leg, and another doctor extends it in a similar manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And if the surgeon enlarges the holes that are made by the second best figure that can be made.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If in the bone's process there are cavities, then you should pierce the entire part in the same place as your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	If you find in that separate area that the intestine is cut and not in your hope for the restoration of the patient, then you should act on it and leave that second hand behind which they have spoken of.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is not healing well, and you have already made a similar capital, then take care of that one.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with red oil and white wax, and it should be more specific and subtle than the others, and press the cloth over that abscess to make it subside; and then remove the wound and pause the prepared powder of clay from the oven, and put the stela on that fracture that is red and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	You know that the number of stones in the arm you saw in the major dispositions is not in a focus or in two foci.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And put your string over the location of the fracture that is strong and strong, and when fewer parts of the fracture or lower parts are removed, stop the string a little while it follows the rememoration of the beginning of the capital.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that cover the fracture are soft and not hard or rough, and the one that is most suitable for it is the one that is the most subtle and coarse, as they have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	This line can be translated as: "Consider the member and its ligament in proportion to the days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If any cause is encountered that requires rectification, then as promptly as possible, cover the part that was injured and insert it into the wet cloth until the pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	If the member does not contract after resting and returns to its former state, then return the stricture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the traction has already been softened and the bone has been made stronger and appears similar to those, then correct everything as much as possible with your own virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive traction of the stricture, then cover that with a little and gradually increase it over time until the nourishment reaches that part, and then tighten it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the thigh does not encounter any cause of those that have been said, then do not cover that it is sliding within the next 20 days or around those areas.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And hang the thigh down with your own strength of movement, and make it sleep on the soft side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	You know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 62 days, or more, and then follows the arrangement of the complexes and the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	This line translates to: "In the treatment of a broken toe and nail.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that at the tip of the finger and on the nails of the fingers, and not happen to them except visible movements.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or dislocation occurs in the finger, you should know that the thigh follows the calf and denies the knee, and stop the finger over that extended area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And if the surgeon extends the bones and the surgeon cuts those that are not good, it is a good congestion.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And you should know that if it does not happen after plastering and stopping, do not apply cauterization; and stop the place according to the quantity of the area, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the sprain is in the fingers of the hand, and you make it look like hope for cloth, and command the thigh to hold that with its hand, the stronger the cloth the longer it will last.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if the bandage is made of strong cloth, in which the cloth is lifted, because the hand is applied to the palm; and hold it according to what you know.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the deformed parts, then cover that you pause on the other side of the part and place your hand on the palm to make it wider and drier; and pause the stricture, as it is rolled around the ring between the two limbs.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you happen to break a bone of the nose, then if it is the tip that breaks, cover it with your hand and hold it firmly and lift it up to the palm of your hand so that the fracture is not damaged. If it is the bridge of the nose, then pause the small stricture as much as possible to elevate the fracture and not cause any harm.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other parts, then hold it as you do in that place, or in the ear, or in the anus, or in the ring, cover it with your hand and see which part is the one that is affected; or all of them are in a continuous line, and it is better; or pause on that small part, as they have said in the tip.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and at that time, the disposition of the cautery apostema and opposite — as in the second operation — I say that you cover when any cause happens to those, according to the story of the cautery.
Capitol .xiv.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you've provided is not in
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	I apologize, but the text you've provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in Catalan, a
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	I apologize, but the text you've provided is not in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It appears to be in Catalan, a Romance language spoken in Andorra, Spain, and parts of France. Here's a possible translation:
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the patient is made in such a way that one bandage is placed over the fracture and another further down the fracture, and the thigh is prostrated over the patient's belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The surgeon extends the bandage all the way to its end according to the quality of the bone in which the fracture occurs.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is necessary to extend the bandage to the neck of the femur, then place the bandage directly on the bone, and the other bandage continues down to the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the trepanation is directed towards the bone, then place the bandage directly on the bone, and the extension is made to the parts further down.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And if the surgeon engages the bone as much as possible within the limits of the joint, reducing it according to the similarity of the natural joint and the bone is united in good union; then apply plaster and stricture, unless it causes pain in the affected member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If pain occurs in the affected member, then remove that part within the days following when the apostem becomes soft, and return to your care.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The stricture of his side pain: cover that covers over the fracture a hard needle, bend to two or three veins, and remain over the superfluity; and cover that comes out at the ankle and the tip of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long fish between the thigh and the part of the denol that comes out at the points, and the ends of the fish come out from the pus-filled parts of the parts, and turn it over the camba and the thigh as much as the superfluity does from the needle.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place your hand over the thigh at the location of that asthenic fracture, and place one stone over the bones of the camba.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And fill the spaces between the camba and the thigh with more cloths, so that the traction is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And begin the stricture with a strong bandage over the location of the fracture at three or four folds, and as you lessen the distance from the location of the fracture, your stricture will be smaller and less pressure and more moisture.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And accordingly extend the ends of the urethra to the parts inside where it may enter the cavity of the foot, and tightly grasp the ends of the other parts so that the urethral limb does not remain outside the usual place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the stretch over that, so that it does not harm the corrosive or post-thrust cautery nor emflacio, and if it harms any cause of those, then cut away from it and correct as much as possible according to what has been seen.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is pressure on the bone that you can engage, then you should cut that second part according to what is possible for you; otherwise, cover it with something and leave it, and care for that which precedes the rememoration inside which is cured.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And if some things are tightening this fracture of the thigh or another thing that is adjusted to those urethra, then so as has been said in the helper and in the arm,
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But nevertheless in the restoration of it in such manner there is no harm to the hiccup; and if it is restored alone, or another thing that is applied to the other camba, then you should need that hiccup from that which you have most used.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You must know that the thigh is tightened for forty days or a few months or a few months, and this is due to the variety of complexions and other compositions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitulum XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the ankle bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You know that fractures of the ankle bone are rare, but they can occur with sudden movement.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If there is an injury to the ankle bone, it is not always a fissure or tear in its parts, and this causes pain or discomfort, and everything is usually felt.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of the ankle bone is such that it is broken as if it were torn apart by the parts of the ankle, which are added and connected in order to achieve equality and difficulty and facilitation and production.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply plaster and place your hand on that point; and tighten it as needed for the tightening.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions that have been recommended for other fractures, as it is similar to the application of cauterization and similarity to those that occurred in this case, which is convenient within the one that is healthy.
Capitol .xvi.	I apologize, but I am unable to provide a translation for the source
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	De restauracio de la fractura de la camba is a Latin phrase that translates to "Treatment of the fracture of
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil." is a Latin phrase that translates to:
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	When it happens that a fracture of the specified type occurs in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason a restoration is made of the shoulder as a restoration of the arm brace, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If the three bones are tightly packed, the cushion is converted to all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone is tightly packed underneath, the cushion is converted to the parts of Denant.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the bone is tightly packed from the outside, it is cut off there, and that is due to those causes that are not your own.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then maintain the extension, equilibrium, and alignment of the bones according to that engagement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the cushion is not due to movements, then the extension should be tighter and less flexible, and it will be more in your praise.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if in the cushion there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you engage the stones and that complexly closes the entire operation, you will take pins of iron of the quality that is placed under the causes that are placed on the sides, and so make large cuts; later of those of which there is a small grating, and not be worried about the hands, and be the length of those according to the length of the cushion, and from the denol enter into the push of the side.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And he wraps around each limb according to its length, and stops one on the edge of the socket of one part and the other on the other part, and they are between the bottom of the foot and the ankle.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And if you have the dressings in three locations of the limb extremities and at the middle location, then this structure allows the socket to be prohibited from clinical action on the right and left sides, and is for good posture.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a bandage of lead has been applied according to the length of the socket; and it is placed on the socket so that it preserves that of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And I strongly advise you to do this in fracture, and when it is truly affected.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And for each day, consider the socket and study it according to what is appropriate, and you will guard against gangrene and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, you should immediately stop what I advise so that it may become healthy again.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol. xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	When there is a break in the ankle or foot bones and toes, it is called a fracture.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Not all ankle breaks are fractures; some foot bones may have some cracks, and toes hardly ever break, and when they do it is only a sprain.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the foot bones are broken and sometimes those bones rise above each other, you must stop the patient's leg on the ground prepared as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other leg on that which is raised by those bones, and tighten those, and pull, and untangle those as they turn in their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place plaster and stop the wound, and place the abdomen of the leg on a small table with two claps plastered.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then stretch that on the leg as much as possible, push that which you have wrapped in cloth and other causes of which you indicate.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days, you will undo the ligament, when you will find the bones untangled, or they are broken, or dislocated, and the operation on them will be done with great care.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	If the patient's symptoms are three in number, then restore those, and repeat them as you advised me in the restoration of the three symptoms of the patient.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then, place the second part of the stool one more step behind the first, and put a few of your hand on it; and then the foot of this table that you have recommended to me, and hold it tightly in that knot.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If it is necessary that the bones are two or three or more, then you should place your hand over each of these joints, wrapping them in a thick layer of cloth, and hold the table at the base of the foot, placing one of the corners of the table on the abdomen of the foot to keep it in good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to overlook that you do not consider all the causes that have been said to you in other fractures of the accidents that have been told; and avoid you all accidents that can happen to you.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the hip bone and the femur bone and the thigh bone of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip bone is fractured, make that wedge in that crooked piece, and then lean it slightly towards the end of the two, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	When the midwife uncovers the abdomen and makes it flat as possible, and places her hand on the patient's belly where she hopes to find the fetus; and the woman is in labor and raises the patient's shoulders one by one, until everything is forgotten inside that the part of the abdomen where the fetus is hoped to be and the bones return to their original position.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And pause pillows on the patient's back, and when you need to urinate, make it easier for the abdomen and then urinate, and reduce and return that second pillow to the hand that was initially used, and return the first pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And fast for seven days or until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take once a glass of olive oil and press on the patient's thigh a cannula made of canvas; and enter the entire vesicle into the abdomen, and inflate it through the cannula as much as possible until the vesicle is inflated by the abdomen, and the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And make it full of air and stay for seven days after that has been recommended, until it is cured.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the teeth of a man or woman are crowded, you should administer treatment and apply the remedy recommended in the bone of the ankle.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. This fracture, however, is not hidden in these proximal fractures and does not end, mainly because of that to which you pay attention and use in your study and understand this free word; fourth, this fracture means for you in the larger dispositions of the dresser in restoration and in the stricture of the foot, and therefore you understand it.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the gout attacks a man's member, take garlic from the ground, wrap it around, and put the member in that; and place a covering over it in the dressing cloth, and envelop it, and leave it for three days or wrap it around again, and it will be cured.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Regarding the restoration of bone fractures when it is inflamed.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for that to which the fracture occurs, and especially if the bones are large as those of the thigh or the helper, or it seems to be that you cut and suture that much so if the conditions of suturing are good at you or testify how many have said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the plague flows in, you must cover your mouth with the retention of the wetness that you sprinkle on the wound's edge, if there is no other cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	When beginning to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong it, if you do not want to cause an apoplexy.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If you do not want to cause an apoplexy, then continue the restoration of the fracture within three days, after the apoplexy has subsided, and do not return to him on the fourth day and the third part of the total time that you will spend causing accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is sticking out over the discovered wound, then cover that and cut it down to reduce it and open it with your hands as easily and as little as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not prepared and the equipment for opening the bone is not ready, then reduce it with your hands as much as possible; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight dizzes or nine, and its latitude is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that the surgeon who takes from those three or four according to the quantity you indicate in the curacy in total specialty of fracture is necessary.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	When making the incision, and if there is not enough space due to the patient's condition that it cannot be folded at that time during the operation, then...
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	If it is of sharp extremity that is located in the outer parts; and if the end of the foot is large, and the sole enters into the partitions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is the form of the foot:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is a small pocket.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because the end of the foot comes up high on the end of the eminent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press that in a channel that returns the bone, and it is entangled at some accommodation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then try to entangle the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of the foot is cut is subtle, and does not press on the stitch for good exception, you know that you have inserted the end of that bone inside that instrument has power of this.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone of all that has been recommended, then insert it into that which is desired for you from the scissors that have said; or sharpen that bone with one of the edges in any razor that is possible to you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	When one has found that the bones are rough and have been fractured.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bones are reduced and the pain in the thigh becomes very intense, you know that the bones will not return to their natural position; and then say that I have made great benefit to the thigh.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When you have completed your restoration to the bone, and you submerge yourself in cold sterile water, and particularly if it is summer, and do not stay on the ground or any other cause that may be there, so that you do not suffer from poisoning and corrosion.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And administer salves at the time of the high complement of the bone restoration, and leave the discovered pus undisturbed that is inscribed on the wound by the forceps and used according to the quantity of the pus.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful not to strain the pus on the fracture, that no more motions are made to the fragments, and do not cause any great harm to the thighs that are dead or corroded or distorted, so it is unhealthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the second stricture were to be more severe, it would be softer and different from the other fractures' strictures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the plague is large or the plague is bad, and you fear that there are bad accidents that have been reported, and pain occurs in that place, then do not cover yourself over those altars, less you cover that enclosure with hard sheets in the place of stones and tighten it around that.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the plague has begun to occur, that is, if there is a birth, then you should remove the sheet that was placed over it and administer calguas, as we usually treat plagues, which are treated with tetrafarmacon and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is recommended to you that you remove the liament and consider the plague in every day and evening, after it has been consolidated and closed, and cover that member with that tool so that the incision runs well from there to the parts outside, which are facilitated.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If in the plague there are several days, and it is not consolidated nor separated from the calguas, you should know that here are small parts for which you cover the plague with the hope that it will be treated.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	When you remove the sweat from those that are separated and those that are not separated, those that do not separate and cause the member to bend and cause pain, then insert your hand into the next one that is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	If you encounter the plague or the ulcer, it is a sign of another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should know that you must stop at one of those that I suggest for the cure of the one that was previously mentioned in the capital.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from that in which you cover that your speech covers and you present your hand: when it grows large, lean over the member as the one of the thigh and the helper and seem like to those of the large members, and do not presume attraction of it, nor the extraction of it that motas veguadas happen for aqua the death; having less that passes through, that is more than the cayra per si aprop xx dias or xxx; and you cure the plague if you see it, and if not, lay it.
Capitol .xx.	The text you provided is not in the language of medieval medical
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	1. "Capitol XX" is a Roman numeral, which translates to "20th century" in English. However, this does not seem relevant to the context of a medieval medical treatise. It might be a mistake or an
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	2. "Motas veguadas" translates to "unnatural movements" in English. So, the sentence means: "Unnatural movements occur in this fracture healing process, especially in the joints, and are caused by the figure of the limb; and therefore, it is strongly prohibited for the limb to perform its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	When considering if the node is recent and being administered in those medicines that have stipped the skin of the joint, and enses, and mira, and semblantz, and acrassia, and semblants; in those cases where you take some or all, and comfort them with those that have stipped the skin, or album of hou, or agree, and place that over the node in stop, and bind those around it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And the stricture that does not let it pass through those days; and if it is not removed, repeat it as often as necessary until the node becomes reduced; or strengthen over that layer of plout descentment, where one plout has the property of remaining totally uninflated in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the node has already been converted into peyra and is being stretched and necessity provokes the star of that coytadament, and you divide it by the part of the subsided part of the skin, and insert the superfluity and eminent, or ratz that node within which is reduced; and cure that within which is sick.
Capitol .xxi.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the provided text "Capitol .
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	When a broken bone is being repaired and it is not following the natural course of the limb, it is called a malunion in medical terms.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and if the member subtle and free is affected, then nothing is done except for motivating causes: which are many solutions of the limb and the ligament of the pain that do not follow; or due to excessive stricture of the limbs when nutrients are prohibited from running to the member; or due to excessive embrocation; or due to movement that does not occur at its time; or due to lack of sanctity in the corps of the patient and debauchery of the.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The translation of the first source sentence is: "The treatment for this condition involves applying heat to the affected area and making the patient lie down so that their limbs are extended; also, administer drinks and apply poultices of herbs over the area.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	The translation of the second source sentence is: "And if you pause on the member, so that the belly can attract its nutrients, or continue to irrigate it with water, in order that the nutrient may return to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	The translation of the third source sentence is: "Capitulus XXII
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The translation of the fourth source sentence is: "Of the treatment of the bones when they are restored to their original state and prohibit the operation of the same bones from this point forward.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	The translation of the fifth source sentence is: "When you arrive at the already restored member, so that the sanacio of the same bone is due to its tortuosity and eminence on the trincat, and it is formed in this way, but the member is not prohibited from natural operation, it does not cover that the word of that which exists in that member is of a different trincat.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	The translation of the sixth source sentence is: "More has already been said by doctors and restaurators of those who have done this in our land; and this operation is very dangerous for those who fear the one that causes the death.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	When claudication and nodulation are recent, it is believed that they are caused by watery humors that have entered the soft tissues of the legs, which cause them to become inflamed and swollen, resembling puffiness and redness; and it is thought that the plaster should be applied to the leg in a similar manner, with a beneficial effect on the soft tissues; or that it should be made of a mixture of olive oil and galls, or olive oil and cyprian, and be applied to the affected area; or that they are caused by greasy substances and are twisted around the veins, resembling the effects of some medicines that are used for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And some women are dissolved by constant rubbing with oils that are more humid, and the movement of the member is administered to all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If tortuosity has already become entangled and becomes hard and converted into stone and provokes the need for iron treatment of the member, it is believed that the pus comes from the cecum and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and it is considered sufficient that the superfluous nodulation of those metals in the bones is removed, and there is ease in that area due to the relief of fatigue and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	I'm sorry for any confusion, but the text you provided is not in a
De sermo en dislocacio.	The first line of the text you provided is "Capitol xxiii." This is likely a
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Here is the translation of the first line: "Dislocation is an injury to one of the body's joints, which is prohibited from moving, and the figure of the member is pulled outwards towards the foot, causing great pain and wounds.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When you encounter an acute dislocation, you must penetrate as deeply as possible and quickly reduce it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiffened and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so, you must not hesitate to make the joint mobile and not stiffened at the time of reduction, for if it is not done quickly, muscle spasms and painful contractions will come.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, you must quickly place your hands on the pubic cut, and then reduce the joint so that it pauses the reduction; and the member should be embraced with wet cotton and oil, and the reduction should be made with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire body is treated with this that the remorse comes to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the steps of dislocation according to what follows in fracture; from the beginning of the chest, enter your finger into the end of the chest.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the mandible, go forward.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When the jaw teeth are dislocated and do not fit, and the dislocation of the jaw is caused by one or two hands: that is, if they are loose in their sockets with little movement, and are slightly softened; or if they are completely dislocated and compressed, then they should be gently pushed back into the joint between the thighs where saliva from the mouth comes out, and the tongue of the patient should not be able to close the mouth, and the tongue of the patient should be gently folded in its pouch.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of the jaw is slight, it can be returned to its original position with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When the dislocation of the jaw is complete and compressed, it should be carefully reduced with the patient's tongue, and it should not be delayed for too long.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And is that the physician holds the thigh of the patient, and inserts his hand between the two jaws of the jaw and presses on the side of the dislocation of the jaw that is causing the mouth to open, if the dislocation is in one part; or if he inserts both hands between the two parts, if the dislocation is in two parts, and the others say that they are deformed due to which ones engage; and orders the patient to stop his jaws and release them from any part; and the physician reduces the jaw and opens it when it returns to its original position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If it is difficult to reduce the swelling, and especially if the jaws are dislocated, apply a poultice of water and olive oil, and then enter that the reduction of swelling is lighter than the reduction of jaws and do not delay the reduction of jaws of all, as they have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	When they return and their teeth are closed, and the mouth of the patient is not closed, then place your hand over those powders of scented wax, and use some of rose oil; and thus make it easier for the patients to breathe.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head between two earls, so that he does not have any pain in the right or left side; and do not force any cause; if the patient's bed is under the leopard's paw, then when the pain becomes worse and the jaws are not shut, you should take it that it wants to.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this will make it easier to administer, and do not worry about the edge of the mouth, the food and drink, and the chewing, as long as the jaw is not shut and healthy.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated at some time and have not been converted to their proper places, then use gentle movements to alleviate fevers and frequent sweating, and often the stomach of the patient becomes upset, and often vomiting of pure choler.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	When you see that it is necessary, you will know what to do; and those who have seen it before will advise you on the matter in six days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reducing the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from the shoulder joint due to its continuous movement in the chest; and some are dislocated at their beginning, and this is declared by pain.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the reduction of the thatched roof over the right side of the body and extending the right thighs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And apply force to the location with your hand with a firm grip, so that it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And place your hand over that plaster and powder and press on it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Less the extremity of that which is cut by the knife and continues to be in that place, it is not dislocated at any time; you should know that it has been reduced and closed according to what has been said and according to what appears to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand over that plaster, powder, and bandage, and command the thatched roof to adhere to the wound and to be covered as soon as it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	When this treatment is reduced to its lowest form, the end of the muscle is separated from its original position.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitulum.xxvi.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	When reducing the displacement of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated but in three ways, of which one is dislocated from the beginning of the tendon to the end of it.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the muscle, and this causes pain; and it is not dislocated in the back by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most dislocated and deformed at the end of the tendon, and it is most dislocated in those where the bones are few, and less so in those where the muscles are many; and it is most difficult to reduce them outside.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And many people suffer from striking or pressing, and the muscle of the patient becomes twisted due to twisting, and it is like this because it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	And I advise you to leave this when you are over the patient's body, and to proceed with the cure of the patient.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	This sentence seems to be describing the process of reducing a dislocated shoulder. Here's a possible translation:
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the hip or shoulder is dislocated and you perform forceful manipulations on it, do not panic.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And a reduction of this dislocation is made when it is fresh and the thigh is swollen.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of the hip is when the attendant lifts the thigh to its parts; and places the cushion under the joints, strengthens them in their new position, and the attendant lifts the thigh again, extends it further, and places it down while returning gradually.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	However, if it does not return, and the beginning of the dislocation was severe, days later, you will notice that the thigh is swollen with a hard, knotty, and unyielding skin, and lines of redness and inflammation appear, and the area is administered with milk, sugar, and honey.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And the thigh is pressed on the opposite side and placed down while the dislocation waits for the lana to be between lifted and strictured, and the surgeon places the sole of the foot on the support, elevates the head of the muscle as much as possible, and holds the thigh with the other hand so that it does not hurt the parts on this side, and another surgeon holds the head of the thigh, so that it does not hurt the parts on this side, until that it returns to its original position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish, reduce the second part of this maneuver: and it is that you will be presenting a man who is long than the thigh, and he is from the side of that latz, and enter the muscle of the other side of the thigh and raise the other leg to the parts outside when the thigh is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the tail of the thigh from the parts outside of the belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the thigh is bent, you should know that another cause may be suspended, so that this dislocation returns as soon as possible.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And if it is reduced with another maneuver: and it is that a long stem is fixed on the ground, like a mortier pilot, which is neither heavy nor thin, and its point is placed behind the thigh; push that the point is over the head of the stem, and the thigh is standing according to the length of the stem, and extend the muscle of the other side of the thigh to the parts outside of the other part; and extend the part of the leg of the other side to strengthen it, so that the joint returns to its original position at a high speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it is difficult to reduce the patient's thigh in all causes that have been said, then use this remedy: and that you take two fists of the quantity which is at the end of two braces, and its latitude is four feet, and the largest part of the thigh is placed in the cavity of the thigh according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then cover the head with clothes so that it does not cause pain to the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then place your hand on the thigh, and extend it over the knee or the leg, and see if the thumb is over the assistant and the leg and the end of the thigh.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a scale according to its latitude, and extend the thigh to the ends, and the other part is suspended from the other side, so that the joint is as close as possible.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the wound of the thigh is complete according to whatever method you can, and you make sure that you leave the thigh dry in the amount of lint that is needed; and you cover it with a plaster prepared with powder of ginger and almond oil over all the muscle, as much as it is possible to turn around, and you tighten the wound more and more, and the limb is turned around on the plaster, and the thigh of the patient is anchored to the neck of the patient, and it becomes less, and not bad for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When the patient's food has been set aside for a little while and the member is comfortable, then it is time to apply the remedy to the patient.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if the food is given less and more water or exercise; and then if it stops and does not soften, the patient has already been healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated by wetness that happens to it or by another cause, then you must know that in that case three points of cautery are given, according to what is said in the capital of cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if it is all true and three days have passed and the limb slides and the joint does not close, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over some parts, and it does not close and cannot raise the arm to the parts on either side, you know that those nerves of yours, which are at the top of the muscle, have already been injured or stretched or softened, and you know that the joint will not remain in place for long.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation of that which is caused by you, you must have the chest and the thighs or the parts behind reduced by impulse and extension over the greatest parts, and then it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When the other stricture is administered and the entrance that is healed is cured.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If the injury is serious in the member and slows down the movement, use the bandage made of woven threads that will alleviate the pain and return to the natural state of the first part.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of a dislocation of the thigh.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the thigh is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and mainly in the part that separates from the part behind, and the dislocation of the thigh is not avoided if you are careful or if you are careless when you see or touch the opposite part, and when you adjust the dislocated thigh, declare it clearly to you, that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch that the other muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover the parts you can, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible that comes to the post-aposteme caut, where if you see the post-aposteme caut, it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, and not all are healed; and especially when you reach the posterior parts, where there is bad luck for all other types of dislocations, with more pain and writhing movements that are needed for that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	When restoring the patient, when it is possible to reduce, it means that the body of the patient should be extended as much as possible, and the arms of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are over the knees and in front of him, and the doctor punctures the joint with a needle at the ends of the fingers or at the base of the palm entangled in its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the hinge parts, then return as if you double the body of the patient at its own body, within which it pierces the thigh with the base of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two hands extend the arms, and hold that extension with those hands so that the extension is not harmed by the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And if the arm is rotated completely, then it should be rolled doubled long over the body of the patient or limbed.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, then apply that oil on any part so that this is those causes which help in lubrication of the joint for ease; and administer strong pressure on the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	When reducing the cover that is placed over the one that is stitched with string and excoriated with album of hair, and is also extended to the stricture below, and the arm is suspended from the collar, and left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And if it is slipped; and then, if the joint is formed in that place, you should slide the limb and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If you see that the joint is not tightening, then you should reapply the plaster and bandage to it, and leave it for several days after it has been stretched; and then slide it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If you happen to fall or the reduction of the joint is not stable, and the position of the leg is in movement, then you should administer hydration and gentle friction in the bath and compresses, until it is released; or rest on the affected joint, which is a heavy moveable part; and then slide it, and leave it over the bone and the nail.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove it and put it in the bath; and when it dries, you should gently rub the joint with temporary friction, and then slide it over the affected part, which is a heavy moveable part, one vein, another, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	When there is an intramuscular wax, if it is limited, it can be removed by a physician.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, stop over the wet and sanded handle of that cow, and apply pressure on that part; and make some marks, four on each side and reduce it to its original position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The treatment of shoulder dislocation is from the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	If the shoulder is dislocated from the chest, and the reduction of the dislocation is difficult, and it is not due to other joints, but rather because of speed in reducing the shoulder at the time when it is dislocated, this is because the location is herniated or because it occurs in the hernia hernia.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder is that you place the joint of the shoulder of the chest on a table and extend the shoulder of that one, and you press your hand or your palm over the entrance of the joint, and push it back to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	When the abdomen is already exposed to the belly of the patient, then place the thigh on the table for extension and reduction; and if dislocation precedes the thigh, then place the position of the thigh of that intrinsic one over the table, so that the doctor's hand covers that joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if you return quickly, good; and otherwise, stretch that arm as much as possible, and let go of that; and do not stop here, for otherwise, you will not be able to reduce the pulsations that pass in those days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint of the Roman is after its tortuosity; and you do not notice any cause at all, except that the thigh is softened and cannot be stretched for any cause; you know that the nerves are trapped or twisted, and you do not engage in it but rather it is stretched with a point on the joint and the force of the doctor confirms any cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And when the wound is returned, place yourself on the stretcher that has been recommended, and let it be loose and stretched for days; and after that, discontinue and let it be loose and the thigh of the patient be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of the patient is stopped and there is any heaviness in the limbs, and there is some pain in certain parts, then enter if it is possible.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some fingers are dislocated in all parts.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger is dislocated in the thumb or the palm of the hand or the chest of the patient, you hold the finger and push it back into its place, if possible, and return it.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And hold the tip of the finger, suspend that part from which it was dislocated, and let it hang for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And suspend that and extend it when the swelling is less on that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is time to take off the splint, read that second narration and do not slide that on the day and exercise movement, and keep it at night; and continue for some days until it becomes firm.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And appear as if this is true, if it is dislocated in the chest of the patient and you hold it at that part and make the second operation within two days, and it will become healthy.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	When it seems that this is called gout when it occurs in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital of the city of xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure for the displacement of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When someone suffers from the complete displacement of any vertebra of the back or neck, and there are still other vertebrae that remain dislocated, and it is not cured, then death will come to the bad end.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And it is said that the excrement of the bad end is outside the will of the person, and cannot be held; and if it is seen that the members are softened by the pain, or the changes in the legs or chest, or one of those; or a vertebra is dislocated at that place, where the pain is felt, and the pain is felt and the displacement of those four parts is made.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it is already softened to the rear parts and is not felt as painful.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The cure of the patient is that you consider if the softening occurs due to weakness, where there is no cure or not for that, nor for the whole.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	When one feels pain in the thigh or leg due to striking or pressing on it, or for appearance's sake, they should immediately seek medical attention. The first source sentence translates to: "When one feels pain in the thigh or leg due to striking or pressing on it, or for appearance's sake, they should immediately seek medical attention.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And say that in yellowish discharge from the genital area, there is no treatment or cure for that; and apparently in that which is made to two lats.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	When it is not cured by any other means but by that which has happened to the two members of the body that I recommend, then it is not cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	If the wound is extended over the face of the patient, covering almost the entire face, and it is extended further down the neck to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then place a cushion under the patient's feet, place it on the ground at the end of the thigh near the head of the patient, and another cushion under the knees of the patient in the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the cushion, and it is not stopped in a depression; and another minister holds the second one in the same way.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap the cushion over the patient's head and hold it firmly with your hand; and extend the end of the belt to the cushion under the head of the patient, and tie it there; and tighten the other belt over the knees of the patient, and adjust all the belts and tie them to the other cushion under the feet of the patient.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	When the minister extends the limb to the end of the thigh, and does not leave any part of the thigh or limb uncovered, it is said that he does not finish until he has seen the patient's condition.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places his hands over the spine for strength as he returns, or over that table, and adjusts the weight of the legs as they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If he does not return in this way, one must use a table where the latitude or longitude is at least three degrees, and dig into the wall of the same place where it has been said that a location for the maze is found at the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And he pauses the path of the table over the spine, and the doctor places his hands on the other end, and stretches as soon as the spine is straight and returns to the original location.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the path that was turned around by the maze; and it is that you must fix the location of the maze at the end of the table, and the longitude of the two thighs should be a degree, and the location of the end of the thigh must be at the end of the two thighs, and the longitude of each thigh should be a palm, and it has been made in each thigh as it turns, and each one must stop on land because there is no harm.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When a joint is swollen and painful, it is called a "gout" by doctors. This condition often affects the feet and can be treated with a pointed cautery to make points on the surface of the foot. If the intestine or hernia needs to be returned to its cavity, the area should be supported to prevent
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	In the end of the joint, a groove is formed in which a pointed cushion is placed, and its length is similar to that of the pointed cushion; in the other two joints, it resembles this one. This means that the same type of cushion should be used for all three joints to ensure consistency in treatment.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then, tighten the ligaments that have been stretched in the chest of the patient in the groove that you have made, and tighten the ligaments that have been stretched in the thighs in the cavity that you have made. This will help to stabilize the joint and prevent further injury.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	You must make sure that each joint is properly aligned and supported by a surgeon who knows how to reduce the joint to its natural position and engage the spine according to the instructions given. This will help to ensure that the joint is properly aligned and functioning correctly.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	This is the form of the joint:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then, push the spine back to its natural position and engage the area around the joint. Then, cover the joint with a damp cloth and stop. Then, place your hand over the dressing and make sure it is securely in place. The length of the spine should be three fingers or more, and the width should be as wide as the joint's width. Over the joint, place a piece of cloth to protect it.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	When you have found the part that has been described, and use the remedy of subtle nourishment that is within it to make it healthy again.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If you find any symptoms in the location at the end of the cure, you should know that medicines have been administered that are harmful and unfit for long-term administration, as recommended; and this has already been administered in that place with a plaster.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	If some signs of danger appear in the back of the spines of the two, and it is due to that displacement; and that part which has already been injured for which there is no hope that it will be healed with this medicine, because it is very difficult for you to add life to it.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated ankle.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not always mean dislocation, but only occur when they are dislocated in those places where dislocations of small removal and concavity also occur.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And when the joint of the ankle is dislocated, it can be due to four causes: either the parts of the fingers, or the parts of the thumb, or the parts of the knuckles, or the parts behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	When the joint is dislocated from the parts of the limb, and you adjust the thigh bone according to the healthy one, it becomes long and hangs downwards that of the healthy one, and the thigh cannot bend the knee that you must stretch the leg, and it is the place where you stretch the leg after the knee joint, because the head of the thighbone has already come here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The first line of the text translates to: "The cause of that by which accidents occur is in the parts that are deformed, because the accidents of this are opposite to that one.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When a dislocation occurs in the joints of the limbs, and the gout is not folded back to its original position, and if it is perforated to go forward and cannot be covered over in the surrounding parts; and the urine of the patient is retained and the erection of the penis is lost, then you must cover the wound with a dressing and the erection of the penis with a bandage, and you must cover the ambulatory with a cloth.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	When a dislocation occurs in the joints of the limbs, and the gout does not expand the part behind, nor can it be folded back to its original position, and the thigh is pushed out, and the erection of the penis is lost, and the end of the thigh is at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Few reductions of this dislocation are possible if you consider it, doctor, if the dislocation is ancient and antiquated, that it has already been treated in ancient times according to the method that you have used for reduction of the limb and Roman after its disposition, doctor, no need to cover that in that care; and then no cause to be amazed.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	When the displacement is recent in that joint, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, you cut along the direction of the joint and extend it to the parts of the fingers and toes, and also to the thumbs on both sides, as much as possible, without requiring another treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If the displacement does not return in this manner, you should prepare for a strong minister and extend the axis of the bone from the end of the part where it is located, or from the one that is most comfortable for you, or from the one that is visible over the axis of the bone; and another minister extends the end of the bone as far as the tips of the fingers; and hold down the tendon on the end of the bone, and another minister holds the extremity of the tendon.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is extension of the bone or of the finger to the ankle at the end of the finger, or from the back to the other foot.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if the extension is of all those in a line between when that part is raised and the side of the earth and hangs down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This special form of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If the dislocation returns, then so be it; otherwise, you will need to do this in all cases that concern your own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the parts of the fingers, cover that the thigh be stretched over the side of the table; and pause the limbs over the ridge of the cushion in that place where the head of the thigh ends and the rest of the cushion begins; and extend the limb from the part of the girdle to the other part of the ankle.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And another minister firmly grasps the braces of the thigh, and presses the large end of the table on the thigh and extends the parts in front by extension strongly, so that it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This method is used in the cure of this member that is reduced, as opposed to the other members.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If you are excused from you and do not obey the entrance of this method of cure of all, then know that the two ends of the thigh are fastened with a strong limb, longer, over the toes and the heels.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	When the length of one part of the body is determined by the quantity of four digits, and the cavity of the thigh is extended more than the other by the quantity of two digits.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And if the thigh is suspended over the head of the chair, and it is in the highest part; and the length of it is equal to two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a young man to cut off the head of the thigh, and suspend it at the other thigh, and the other man to cut off the thigh with forceps, so that the joint returns to its original position quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the reduction itself, when there is a dislocation at the end of the part, it is necessary that the thigh covers the groin according to what has been recommended in the case; and it is tightened over the cavity of the thigh actually and over the chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And if two thighs are placed, one on the foot and the other on the head; and if the thighs are adjusted to the edge of the pillow that is on which the humors are folded, so that the thigh does not get caught between the thighs of the patient, because you must extend the parts beyond the knee, otherwise it will be torn.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And if every minister extends his hand to his part, and the doctor places his hand on it and reduces it according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If you are obese, you should fast greatly; and if not, be diligent and listen to what has been said in the gastrointestinal tract for that constipation.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Indeed, how that bad smell comes over the private parts.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the joints, it is necessary to extend the cambric leaguerly, and follow this narrative on the hill; and the physician places the palm of his hand over the bad smell, and presses it with the other hand on the adjacent part, and that extension stops at the adjacent joint.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is behind the joints, it is not necessary to extend the bad smell to the adjacent parts, and he should be raised on the ground; if there is a hard cause, listen to what has been said about the pain of the thigh when the ankle is dislocated in the rear parts, following what has been said about the jamming of the thigh over two thighs; and it should be over the face and the limbs are extended, following what has been said, there will be no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When joint pain is being treated with pressure, place the table over the location where you want to apply the compression.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, when the reduction is complete — and the member that was reduced is returned to its original position — you should adjust the thighs and place an ice pack on the part that is not too wide in any of the parts; and secure the member with bandages for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and ice pack, and compare one thigh to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those joints in position, you know that the dislocation is firmly fixed, and then let the member go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If you see any cause of softening, return and apply that, and then extend it again according to your first stretch, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then remove that bandage, and let it rest in the ambulance for several days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	I apologize, but the provided text is not in a language similar to
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Dislocation of the toe
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	This line seems to be discussing the location of a dislocated bone. Here's a possible translation:
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	When the sign of dislocation of the leg is that the patient applies their hand to the thigh, you should know that it is indeed dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all the fingers of the patient is that you stretch the thigh of the patient, if it can be extended beyond that; attach the other end to the face of the patient, and place the thumb between the patient's thighs; and appropriately attach the finger of the patient to your palms, and retie those between the fingers of the patient's hand over the joint for strength, and another minister extends the thigh until the finger returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of reduction of the leg is that the patient's hand clings to the thigh, lifting no labor.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And apply an ointment to that and make the hand cling to the thigh, and tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the walking aid for more than a few days, until it is healthy and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the foot to you is excused, then administer strong support to the limbs that were in the care of the ankle before this report.
Capitol .xxxiii.	I'm sorry for the inconvenience, but the provided text is not in a
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	The text is written in Medieval Latin and it seems to be a part of a medical treatise about the treatment of a dislocated ankle (
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The text is written in Medieval Latin and it seems to be a part of a medical treatise about the treatment of a dislocated ankle. It states that sometimes the ankle can be dislocated by gentle traction, while other times it requires more forceful manipulation. The dislocation can occur at the joint or at the surrounding bones.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The text is written in Medieval Latin and it seems to be a part of a medical treatise about the treatment of a dislocated ankle. It states that sometimes the ankle becomes swollen after the dislocation, which can be caused by the part of the ankle that was dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The text is written in Medieval Latin and it seems to be a part of a medical treatise about the treatment of a dislocated ankle. It states that the treatment of the traction of the ankle is usually gentle, and it should be extended as far as possible without causing pain, and then slowly returned to its original position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	The text is written in Medieval Latin and it seems to be a part of a medical treatise about the treatment of a dislocated ankle. It states that when the ankle is dislocated by forceful means, one should immediately make a reduction, and hold the ankle with a firm grasp of the back part of the two fingers on the opposite side of the ankle in the patient's leg.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	When you approach the second toe of the swollen foot, and your left hand is in the location of the swelling on the foot.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then hold the foot with your right hand, and stretch your left arm twice, and extend your left arm; and press the chest of the foot with the left hand at the second toe.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And then make the same movements according to the number of counts.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the chest of the foot with the left hand at the third count, and you are in the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if you return in one count or two seconds after this hand movement, and you see the foot swell, stop; and otherwise, continue with the operation, and wait for it to return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	However, if you are prohibited from reducing the hand that has been recommended, place the thigh on a hard surface over the ground, and stretch out a flat piece of earth on the ground that fits between the thighs, and you have already rolled over the drap so that it does not expose the wound.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	When the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot over the patient's most or the one that lies on the collar of the foot; and extends that same minister against the extension of the leg part, and the hand is present between the patient's thighs, retaining it there, so that this action of yours does not cause pain in the parts beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And if the surgeon reduces the displacement of the leg bones, and another servant holds the patient's thigh firmly in its place, so that the displacement returns to ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the displacement returns to its original position and is declared healthy by you, stop plastering and extend it further, and tie the foot to the leg with a cord.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful or take care of the nerves that are behind the heel, so that the foot over that is not too tight and does not cause pain to the leg.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And keep it like this for two or three days, and if the foot becomes soft, extend it further.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	When the swelling is reduced by the third day or the fourth, and it is forbidden for the patient to walk for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it is necessary to walk on that space, it is not safe to assume that the dislocation is not over the dissolved and corrupted part, and therefore it does not receive care.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you encounter this cauterization point, it is necessary to administer care in the hydration of the water that was previously mentioned in our narrative, in another place of care and embellishment, until it is rejuvenated.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol, Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the care of the dislocation of the two feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cover that the one who is dislocated is engulfed by little extension of his work; and that it is not difficult, almost all.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in the two toes of the foot, it is necessary to cover that you make cut the sole of the foot on the ground or on a table, and be present as if it were going to happen.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And if you are standing on the foot, and place the other foot on that which you imagine to be from the joints, and apply that to the foot with your hand until it returns, and see that it is engulfed and does not appear in the most prominent place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then pause the abdomen of the foot of the patient on a table that grasps the entire foot, which has two caps, and press that with a firm grip for three days; and then remove it and make it heal gradually over fourteen days, until it is stretched and secured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that are caused by pain or fracture or by some other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause happens to those, and you are in the care of that and its restoration, many steps will follow until the death of the patient.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore it is not presumptuous to assume that the care of the patient is in the art, long practiced, merciful and pious, late, neither arrogant nor presumptuous; and that it should be used at the beginning of medicines which only give apostemas, and lay the blame on divine judgment, not on that to which one hopes for salvation, but on that for the alleviation of pain, and in which there is some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then spend so much effort on reducing him at the beginning of the cause, because it will eventually lead to cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the member returns later than you want, administer the regimen that causes cautery and cures gout, as is necessary for the relief of the pain caused by the dried-out members.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is mistaken for fracture and occurs in the separated bones of the pubic region, you should pierce the statement of those bones, and do as has been said in the simple maladies of this to prevent any further damage.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid afterwards the intrament in the ways of fear following what I have preached; for this is better for you to owe your true Creator, and less permanent for your glory, and less salutations to him as you see those in his time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	This is the end of the paragraphs of Albucasim, perfectly translated from the original Latin text. May God be pleased with these.
Amen.	Amen.
