Having completed this book for you, my sons, the last of the knowledge in medicine with its complement, and having reached an end to it through explanations of it and declarations thereof, it seemed to me that I should complete it for you along with this Treatise which is part of the operation, namely surgery with one's hand.
Since the operation with the hand is utterly private in our region and in our time, and perhaps the knowledge of it has perished and its trail has been lost, and there have not remained from it except small descriptions in old books which hands have altered and into which error and hesitation have occurred until their intentions were closed up and their force was weakened. It seemed to me that I should bring it back to life along with the arrangement of this Treatise by way of its position, declaration, and abbreviation: and that I should be reconciled with the forms of iron instruments, cautery, and other tools of the operation with the addition of explanation and the necessity for them.
However, the reason why a good craftsman of it with his own hand is not found in this our time, is: because the art of medicine is long and its author must be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy which Galen narrated, until he knows the remedies for limbs, and their forms, and their connections, and separations, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, and their numbers, and their exit and entry, and places of exit of arteries, pulsating and quiet, and outlets.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that a name with a name is much, but with work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken of him at the entrance to this book.
Since he who is not knowing what we have said about anatomy is not purged, lest he already falls into error by which men are destroyed: just as I have seen many of those who are formed from this science and boast of it without knowledge and without experience.
What happened was that I saw a foolish doctor cut an apse of elephantiasis on the throat of a woman, and he struck some arteries in the throat; why the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who supposed to draw out a stone from a man, who was advanced in age, and the stone was great. Therefore he came to him and drew it out along with a piece of the bladder. Why the man died on the third day.
And I myself had been called to draw it out, and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was taking a fee from one of the Dukes of our land on account of medicine: and he happened to an eunuch black man who was with him, breaking in his leg near the heel: and the doctor hurried with his ignorance, and compressed the fracture over the wound with poultices and bandages tightly bound, and did not let out any breathing from the wound.
Then he left him according to his desires. Then he dismissed him after a few days, and commanded him not to untie the bandage: and he stood thus until his leg swelled with pustules, and his foot also, and it came to destruction.
Therefore I was called to him: and I hurried to untying the bandage: and peace followed, and he escaped from his pains.
But corruption had already been confirmed in the member, and I was not able to restrain it.
So then the corruption ceased to move through the member, until it perished.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess: and it became ulcerated after days, until the evil grew great with his lord.
That is, because when the cancer is pure from a melancholic humor, then it should not be reached with iron altogether, unless it is in a limb that can tolerate it, so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And because of that O' Father's, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, an operation which is associated with health, and an operation with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already marked in every place of this book, where the operation comes, in which there is fear and trembling.
Wherefore it is necessary for you to beware of that and depart from it, so that foolish people may not find the way to talking about it and dishonoring it.
Therefore take the measure with solicitude and protection, and care for your patients with facility and firmness, and use the better way leading through God's grace to salvation and a praiseworthy succession: and dismiss terrible afflictions difficult of healing: and take your souls away from that which makes you fear, so that doubt may not enter upon you in your faith and advantage.
For indeed it remains more for your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your profit.
Galenus has indeed said in some of his own warnings. You will not cure the bad affliction: do not call yourselves evil physicians.
However, I have now divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
The First Chapter.
On Caustic with fire, and Caustic with sharp medicine, divided, and ordered from head to feet, and forms of instruments, and tools of the cauter, and all that is necessary in the operation.
The Second Chapter.
On incision and perforation, bloodletting and purging, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar things to that: and all divided and ordered according to forms of instruments.
There is no text provided for me to translate. The "Capitulum tertium" appears to be a chapter heading from the book by Albucasis, but there is no accompanying text to translate. If you would like to provide the actual Latin text from this chapter, I can attempt to translate it into English for you.
On the restoration and reduction of displacements and torsions, and similar things: a chapter ordered from head to feet, and forms of instruments.
But first of all, before I remember the operation with him, it is necessary that I say what are his qualities and harms of cautery, and in which complexion he should be shown.
I therefore say that the word about the quality of cautery and its harms is a long and subtle discourse, knowledge and a hidden secret.
And many wise people have spoken about it and disagreed on the matter; and for me indeed enough is said from their words, fearing lengthening.
I therefore say that cautery is applied universally to every complexion, which is with matter and without matter: excepting the two complexions, which are hot complexion without matter and dry complexion without matter.
But in the hot and dry complexion with matter they disagreed. For some said that cautery is beneficial in it. And others said the opposite of that, namely that cautery is not suitable in a disease which is from heat and dryness: because the nature of fire is heat: and it is improper for one to be healed from a hot and dry disease with something hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite said that through cautery a benefit is made in every hot and dry disease which occurs in the bodies of men: because when you compare the body of man and his humors to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man to be cold.
And I myself say by his words: because experience has already revealed it to me on several occasions.
However it is not necessary that he should come over this unless he who has already been tested and exercised in the exercise of cautery, and knows the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of illnesses within themselves, and their causes, and accidents, and the span of time for them.
But from the other complexions there is no fear over you, and especially in cold and moist illnesses. For indeed all physicians have agreed on these and have not disagreed with Cautery in treating them.
And know, sons, that from the secret of treatment by Cautery with fire and its goodness over Cautery with burning medicine is this: because fire is simple, whose action does not reach, unless to the member that is cauterized, and it does no harm to another connected member with it, unless a small damage.
The action of burning medicine indeed reaches to that which is removed from the members, and perhaps it causes an accident in a member, a difficult-to-heal illness, and perhaps it kills.
But fire because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance does not do that, unless there is an excess.
And indeed this has become clear to us through experience, because of the length of service and study with art, and standing on the truth of things, and because of that I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not so, because this is not permitted in my book, I would have brought you the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies of expulsion, by which it expels illnesses with a philosophical speech demonstrated to your minds.
And know, sons, that they themselves disagree about the time in which it is suitable to make a cautery, and place better the true time.
And I say that a cautery is suitable at all times: therefore, because an injury occurring due to the passage of time is submerged in healing, which is drawn with a cautery. And especially if the cautery is for pains from necessary, strong, and grievous pains which do not tolerate delay: therefore it is feared that a more serious harm will occur than the slight injury that passes with time.
And may it not fall into your minds, oh sons, that which the common people and foolish doctors do not think, namely that the affliction that is cured by a cautery does not always recover: and they put forth this consequence, and the thing is not as they think: therefore a cautery is not, except in place of medicine, which alters the complexion, and dries up the humors that are causes why pains occur.
However, a cautery is useless on top of medicine because of the speed and effectiveness of its own health and the power of its operation and the intensity of its dominion: and it is possible that the affliction returns an hour or some time later according to the complexion of the sick man and the location of his affliction and the strength of it: and what is prepared in his body from the aggregation of excesses within him: and which comes to him in its acquisition from foods and similar things from causes, unless the affliction occurs where the cautery is administered.
A subtle affliction in a few excesses and humors of a member, such as tooth ache from a cautery on the teeth, and similar to these, it is possible that the pain will not return in that place. But this happens in only a few cases.
But the common people's speech again, that a cautery is last resort of medicine, is true: not for what they intend by it: because they believe that there is no cure which comes with medicine, nor with any other after the cautery has been applied.
However, it seems you forgot to provide the text. Please paste the Latin text from the medieval translation of Albucasis' textbook on surgery, and I'll translate it into English for you.
The antiqui said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron. And they did not say this, unless because of the equality and subtlety of its substance. And they said that a place does not become suppurated from the cautery. But that is not absolutely true; for I have already tested it and found that it does not do this in some bodies without doing so in others.
And cautery with it is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you put the cautery made from gold into fire, it is not clear to you what quantity of fire you are using because of the redness of the gold: and when it hastens towards cold, and if you add more heat on top of it, it melts in the fire and turns into plates.
Therefore, the craftsman falls short of it in terms of the task: and because of this, cautery with iron becomes quicker and more convenient for us than with gold, in accordance with righteousness to the operation.
And for my part I have already arranged this chapter on Cautery according to chapters and have arranged it from head to foot so that the seeker may easily find what he wants in it.
Chapter 2.
Cauterization here corrects the lordship of moisture and coldness over the brain, which are causes of headaches and the multitude of fluxes of fluids from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and the multitude of sleepiness and toothache and throat pain: and in general all afflictions that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis and epilepsy and apoplexy and similar ones from those afflictions.
The method of cauterization is as follows: you should first administer to the ailing person medicine in liquid form that purifies the head for three nights, or four, according to the strength of the ailing person and their age and habit.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor. Then have him sit between your hands square, so that he has already put his hands on his chest.
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose in between his eyes. Therefore wherever your middle finger has reached, mark that spot with caustic.
Then ignite the cautery oil mixture, whose form is this.
Then place it over the marked spot with caustic, descending as you gradually turn your hand, so that it is drawn back. Then quickly withdraw your hand and look at the place.
And if you see that already a quantity has been revealed from the bone of the head, or a quantity of flesh, then withdraw your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the iron itself, or with another from it when it has cooled, until the bones that I told you of are visible.
Then take some salt, dissolve it in water, and soak a cloth in it, and place it over the spot: and leave it for three days.
Then place a cloth that has been soaked in butter over it, and leave it on the spot until the burn's scab is destroyed. Then take care of it with the ointment of four medicines, until it heals.
They have said that as much as the wound remains more open, it emits pus: therefore it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized all the way to the bone: and the cautery should be held until something of the thickness of a bone is burnt.
Then it is carved out of bone after what has been burnt, then it is treated.
And others say that it is necessary to reach the end with a cautery until it imprints on the bone an impression like the form of a small cauldron: or else the instrument that women place on an infusion of small alphabet letters. And they suppose that vapors are exhaled from this place of the head, and the open wound is left for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it consolidates.
But to me they do not seem altogether to be a cauterizing of this kind, except perhaps in some men according to the course of fear.
And leaving it alone, I think it is better for its own safety.
For the head is weakened by the dissolution of its own natural continuity, just as we have testified in other limbs, and especially when a weak and feeble person's head is involved. Indeed, I think that first kind of cauterizing is safer and better for me, and I use it: so let us proceed with this in order to heal.
Chapter 3.
When there is a long-standing pain throughout the entire head of an invalid, and he has used honey, and mustard, and vinegar, and oils, and poultices. And especially if it has already been cauterized with the first cautery that we have narrated, and it does not bring any relief to him: then consider. For if the head of an invalid is strong and robust by nature, not feeble, and finds a severe coldness: then cauterize it with another cautery slightly below. Then cauterize it above every horn of his own head with a cautery, but let it not pass through the skin, and uncover the quantity which we have narrated from the bone. And cauterize him with a cautery one on the back of his head, at a place which is called "the jug": and it is the place where poultice is put: and lift up your mother in this way, and do not make an incision in the mouth. For indeed he finds pain there because of it, a violent pain, and different from the pain of other cauterizations on the head of all.
And I will say that this cautery is in its place: and it must be a cautery by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and his occiput more subtly with a cautery by which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Chapter IV.
When the pain happens in one part of the head and swelling, or when the pain spreads as far as to the eye, and the head is cleaned with purifying medicines, and the rest of the treatment which I said in the divisions of infirmities is administered, and that does not cure it all: then the cauterization in it is according to two manners: either cauterization with burning medicine: or with iron.
The cautery with burning medicine is, as you take one tooth of garlic, and scrape off its skin, and cut off the ends from two sides. Then split the place of pain with a wide lancet until it is under the skin where the tooth takes hold.
So put it into the place under the skin until it is hidden: then bind a cloth tightly over it with a suitable constriction, and leave it for fifteen hours, then dissolve it and take out the garlic, and let the ulcer remain two days or three: afterwards put a linen cloth soaked in butter on top of it until the place becomes pus: then cure it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do that with certain medicines inflaming, which I wrote in the twelfth book, on Inflaming Medicines.
His cauterization with iron is done in this way. Fire caustic, whose shape is this.
And it is called Clavus because its shape resembles the shape of a key, wherein there is something curved and in the middle thereof is a small prominence.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand back; and you turn the iron gradually with speed; and let the quantity that is inflamed be half of its thickness. And raise your hand, so that the artery below does not become inflamed and a flow of blood occurs.
Then soak the cotton in salt water and place it on the spot, and let it be for three days; then put the cotton with butter upon it; afterwards cure it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemicrania with the second part of the cutting instrument of caustic. And beware of an incision into the artery in this hemicrania, lest it become inflamed properly.
On the manner of cauterizing in ancient hemicrania.
When you treat hemicrania, with what we said from the preceding cure, and what we said in the divisions of pains, and the treatment does not bring relief: and you see from the pain, that it is not sufficient for him whom we mentioned by the first cauter with medicine, or with cauter with fire, then it is necessary to use the iron caustic knife, until it whitens after you mark on the spot of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger's length, or rather that: and put your hand in place one time, and bind it until you cut the artery, and come up to the bone.
However it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuity of the jawbone, which moves during mastication, lest the side or the nerve that moves it becomes irritated, and thus spasms occur.
And be on guard and take care also to prevent the flow of blood from the cut artery. For indeed there is fear in cutting it, and especially for one who does not know what he is doing, nor is diligent or experienced, and leaves the operation as his first priority.
And I come back with a reminder of the rule for regulating the flow of blood that has occurred from an artery according to its own manner and in its proper place in this book.
But if you see from the illness that this cautery is not sufficient for him, and you see that the body of a weak person tolerates a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, take care of the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we said to be used in the chapter on extracting an artery with a cautery having two knives. For indeed this cautery is better and more beneficial.
On the manner of cauterizing an earache.
When a pain occurs in the ear from cold and is treated with liniments and the rest of the treatment which we said to be divided, but the pain does not depart, then use a caustic fire and it is that which is called Point, whose form is this.
Then make points with it around the ear after its ignition all around, as it turns over; or around both ears at once if there is pain in both. And extend yourself with the caustic a little from the root of the ear after you have marked the places with cerate; and let the quantity of the caustic be ten points all around each ear, and so on.
Then cure the place until they are healed.
About the way of cauterizing in a torture device.
Chapter 7.
A torture that is cured with cauterization is nothing other than from kinds of afflictions which occur due to phlegm, according to what we said about divisions of illnesses.
And it is suitable for cauterizing the species that occurs from dryness and spasm of the nerve.
When you cure this kind of torture with herbs, and poultices, and gargles, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and a second little lower than its place, and a third at the conjunction of the two lips.
And place your cauterization on the opposite side of the weak part. Because softening does not occur unless in the part that appears to be healthy.
And the shape of the cautery is that you cauterize it with a cautery on the direct end of the upper ear extremity below the horn of the head, and another at its time, whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cautery until it burns a quantity of the middle thickness of the skin.
And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is a kind of knife, whose form was mentioned before: however it is not finer than little, as you see: and it must be a knife with a little excess thickness.
Then cure the place, with what preceded, until it heals.
About the way of cauterizing in Old Apoplexy.
When the old apoplexy is stirred up and you cure it with what we said, and your treatment does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries over all of his head's horn, and a cautery in the middle of the head, as we mentioned, and a cautery on the back of the head, according to what preceded: and the manner of the cautery is according to what preceded.
Even cautery is applied with a cautery over the mouth of the stomach: and it is the most extreme.
Then it is to be scraped, with that which preceded.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the drink they be given first to the ailing person hawthorn of great quantity and cleansing pills for the brain.
Then shave the head of the ailing person completely and place on the back of his head a plaster of pine resin described in the treatise on plasters, and put it on him several times.
For indeed that is the manner of cautery: and make it according to the same order which I said there.
If therefore he be healed by that, well. If not, then make three cauteries on the back of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye, and place between every cautery a thickness of a finger.
Then care for the cautery, with that which preceded it.
But if you wish to add an additional one, and he is a patient suffering from it: then make a cautery in the middle. And if you wish to add another, then cautery him over both horns.
Then take care of him until he be healed; and let the cautery be with oil according to the form which was said before.
About the manner of cautering for paralysis and relaxation.
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you proceed in cleansing the head with hawthorn and with what we said before.
Then shave the head of the ailing person: afterwards cautery him with a cautery on the middle of his head, and a cautery over every horn of his head, and a cautery on the back of it, and three on the vertebrae of his neck.
If however you are in a condition of softening the body by many things, and he is infirm and weak, and the suffering is strong: then cautery him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and the last with cautery, until it burns much from his skin, and lift up your hand. Then cure him, until he be healed; and thus anoint the cautery with oil.
Concerning the manner of cautering in epilepsy.
An epileptic is not to be cauterized, unless it be the one whose epilepsy is from phlegm.
It is therefore necessary that you cleanse his brain with rue first, and with the rest of the cure which we said in the division: when he is very weak, or tolerates not well the taking of medicines.
But if he is a child, who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargling and purifying chewing of the brain is administered to him, for many days before that with a bettering of food.
Then scrape his head after, then cautery him with one cautery in the middle of his head, following as it preceded in manner: and another cautery on the back of his head, and over all his ear cauldrum with a cautery. But if he is weak yet strong, and tolerates well, then cautery him with the cauteries which I said for one having paralysis, and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck, and vertebrae of the back: and let the cautery be anointed with oil according to the manner which preceded.
But if he is a weak child, then put a subtle cautery on him, in this manner.
Concerning the manner of cautering in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cautery him with the cauteries which we said for one having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an abundance of bile leading to melancholy, and the body of the ailing person is humid, then give him a drink that will purify his brain, according to what was said in division: then rub the head of the ailing person and make afterwards a bandage well made from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of his head: and let the ailing person sitting upright be held by all parts.
Then apply an ointment. And it is more suitable from the butter of old sheep. And warm him over moderate heat on fire with a temperature measure that a finger can endure when inserted into it. Then empty it out from the middle of his head into a circle, and let him go until he cools down.
Make this for the ailing person once every week, with his other good regimen, until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cautery him by making many small points on him, except that you hold your hand with the cautery: and let it smell.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with quality.
Then place over it a cloth soaked in butter or hen's fat.
A method of cautering descending to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the principle of water is declared to you in the eye through signs, as I said in division, then begin and drink the ailing person with that which purifies his head.
And guard him from all humidity, and make him sit in a bath on empty days for several days.
Then order him to rub his head and cautery himself in the middle of his head. Then cautery him above both temples with two cauteries, if there is an onset of water descending in both eyes at once: or from one side, if there is an onset of water in one eye: and cut out with a cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in breadth over the temples: and beware of blood flow.
If you see something from it, then cut him off immediately with any medicine that is possible: and I come away with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them, and taking care against bleeding.
And sometimes he is cauterized on the neck, under two bones, with two blisters produced at the end.
On the manner of cauterizing in old tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and constant: and they are over veins, and arteries which are manifestly on the outside of the head, it is verified that this is from cold and phlegmatic excesses: then cauterize with a cautery same as I narrated in the incision of descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two blisters above two temples, and two blisters on the neck under two bones. And if you need an increase, then cauterize him on every side of the eye carefully, over the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
On the manner of cauterizing in a foul odor of the nose.
When you are treating him with that which we said in the division, and the treatment does not agree: then hasten, and give him infirmocochias to drink for three nights: then scrape his head, and cauterize him with a middle cautery, with an oil-bearing cautery. Then cauterize him with a key cautery two times, on the two eyebrows under the hair a little.
And be careful of the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of a key cautery.
On the manner of cauterizing in softening the eyelid.
When the eyelid of the eye becomes softened by illness or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, with this moon-shaped cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize him above the eyebrows a little with two cauteries in each part; and lengthen them from both eyelashes: and let the length of all the cauterie be according to the lengths of the eyebrow; and do not finish your hand with the cauterie, nay, according to what is scorched one third of the eyelid.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs are inverted and pierce the eye.
The cautery in that case is according to two modes: either a fire-cautery, or a burning medicine-cautery.
But in the fire-cautery, first order the patient to pluck out his hairs beforehand, if he has those which clean them, until they are lengthened and conformed. But if they pierce him at the root: then bind his eyes with a strip of cloth so that they may not be moved until they grow again.
So when they grow and conform, then place the patient's head in your bosom; afterwards mark above his eyelid with wax, a mark shaped like a myrtle leaf, and let its beginning be near the hairs.
Then place a poultice soaked in egg-white: or on mullein sap over the eye.
Then make a cautery with fire, whose shape is this.
Then cauterize over the figure you marked slowly in many stages, until the surface of the skin is completely burned, appearing like a proper shaped leaf of myrtle.
And the sign of the work's health is: that if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the hairs raised at the point of the eye.
Therefore lift up your hand then, and let him go for three days.
Then place over it a cloth with butter, until the scab is eradicated. Then care for him with ointment, until he heals.
But if some hair comes back again after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat cauterization over that place, just as you did at first.
But if the hairs are in the lower part [of the eyelid]: then cauterize it, until it is raised to its natural place; and it will be equal so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
It is so that you may instruct the patient to remove the hairs until they are prolonged and equalized. Make from cloth a shape of a myrtle leaf.
Then take from known soap and from unimbued chalk each a weight of one ounce or almost that amount; then mix them together with good grinding and make it quickly so that it does not become cold. Then spread a piece from it over the cloth which you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eyelid of one eye or two. And place under the eye a cloth soaked in egg white; and the head of the patient be in your bosom.
And place your index finger over the medicine, and press it slightly. And you move it whenever the patient feels a stinging of the medicine, for the sting finds its way like fire.
While therefore this which he himself feels a stinging continues, then remove the medicine and move it with your finger. When therefore the stinging quiets down, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And then consider if you see the eyelid raised, like when it is contracted with fire or with an incision, it is well; and if not, then repeat over it from the medicine above the place in which the medicine did not penetrate nor become darkened, until your operation is equalized and the eye is constricted.
Then place over it a compress with butter until the burnt skin is scraped away. Then treat him with a transparent ointment, or another, until he heals.
And it is necessary for you to take care during the operation that nothing from the medicine falls into his eye.
But if the eyelid becomes soft after a day and something gets into his eye from his hair, then repeat the medicine over that place which has become soft from the eyelid properly, just as you did at first. Then treat him until he heals.
And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of men differ in size and smallness. Therefore according to this, let your consideration be: and justice is not hidden from him who has zeal for this art.
About the way of cauterizing a tear duct fistula.
When you treat the fistula, with what we said about the suffering and your treatment does not bring relief: then it is necessary that you cauterize it itself in this way.
Order the sick person to place his head in your arm and hold his head with one hand so that it may not be moved or shaken with his own head.
Then place the infused cataplasm on his eyelid or on the mucus of the plant silphium over his eye; then with a fire cauterizer in this form.
Let it be concave, like the form of a vulture's feather quill at one end, with which the cauterizer is made: and if you wish it to be penetrating up to the other extremity, and if you wish it to be thus stretched upwards.
However this concavity is better for your task.
Then express the fistula if it is open and draw out from it pus and dry it up; and if it is not open, then open it and drain its pus.
Then place upon it a cauterizer, which is made very hot.
And hold your hand near the cauterizer with the eye, up to the nose, so that your hand does not stray or bother the patient; and place the cauterizer on the eyelid fat and corrupt it.
If then you reach to the beginning of your cauterizer up to the mouth, it will be good. And if not, then repeat the cauterizer once or twice as you need to; and leave it for three days.
Then place a compress with butter on it, and care for the eye with a drying ointment until it heals.
But if forty days pass and it does not heal: then place on it a sharp corroding medicine until the eye socket is uncovered; and scrape it according to what comes up in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some of the first said. Pay attention to the place of the fistula and find it; then place in it a thin caming, that is, a thin cannula, whose shape is this. And pour into it a quantity of drachma of molten lead, and hold your hand with good cannula retention, and the patient must not be moved at all, so that he does not run or reach the molten lead to his eye.
And it is necessary to place on the eye of the patient a compress soaked in egg white or in water.
For lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it with a wondrous healing.
Which if the fistula is healed, along with what we said from the cauterizing and the cure, it is good. And if not, then necessity is that you administer a nostril hole and lead the fistula back to its natural course, according to what comes up to its own place.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing in clefts of the lips.
Fissures frequently occur in the lip which are called clefts, and most especially in the lips of boys.
When therefore you treat these clefts as we said in the division of diseases, and treatment does not help, then with a small burning iron cuteler, according to this shape.
And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then place the burning iron hastily into the clefts themselves, until the cautery reaches the depth of the clefts.
Then treat it with ceruse, until it heals.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing a fistula of the mouth.
When an apostema occurs at the root of a tooth, or on the palate, or at the roots of teeth: then it makes pus and bursts: afterwards it becomes inflamed and runs with pus and forms a fistula: then you treat this and treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you prepare a burning cautery according to its size so as to enter into the fistula. Then insert the burning iron into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches its depth and last part: do that once or twice.
Then treat it afterwards with what we said concerning treatment until it is healed.
If therefore the discharge is cut out and heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to lay open the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what will come into its head.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing in softened gums and teeth.
When the gums are softened because of moisture and the teeth are loose and you treat them with medicines and it does not help: then place the head of the patient in your armpit.
Next, a cauterization by fire, the form of which will appear after this. Place a cannula over the tooth and insert into it a burning cautery quickly. And hold your hand for a brief moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
And lift up your hand: then reinsert the cautery a few times, as you wish.
Then the patient should fill his mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour and then spit it out.
For the tooth is strengthened by movement, and the inflamed gum is tightened and the corrupted moisture dries up.
About the manner of cauterizing for pain of the teeth.
When the pain of the tooth is because of coldness, either there is chill within it or a worm, and treatment does not bring relief with medicines, then a cautery is applied to it in two ways: either a cautery with butter or a cautery by fire.
The cautery with butter is, that you take sour butter and boil it in a metal or earthenware pot. Then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the cautery. Then immerse it in the boiling butter and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools down; then reinsert it a few times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse a cloth or rag in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth; then place a hot iron over it until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
The cauterization with fire is, that you take a metal or iron air cannula. And there should be something thickness within his body so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the sick person.
Then take a cautery by fire, whose shape will come; and place it on that tooth; and hold your hand until the cautery cools.
Do this several times, for the pain will be driven away, either on that same day or on another day.
And it is necessary that during the pressure of that cautery, the sick person fills his mouth with good beeswax and holds it for one hour; then he spits it out.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
Apply cauterization with whatever extremity you wish according to what is possible; and this is the shape of the cannula.
On the manner of cauterizing in fistulas.
When fistulas are from phlegm and from cold moistures, and they do not obey digestion by means of medications, and you wish to hasten their digestion: then take a concave cautery by fire, whose shape is this.
Having two open extremities, so that smoke can issue from the other end of the cautery; and place it lit over the fistula once, and a second time if you need to, until it reaches the depth of the fistula.
But if the fistula is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the fistula.
Then leave it for three days, and place a warm poultice on it in butter until what was burned by the fire is removed.
Then care for it with tooth ointment, until it heals to its natural shape of a cannula.
On the manner of cauterizing in hoarseness of voice and constriction of breathing.
When moistures cling to the trachea and particularly when it is with coldness of complexion, then it is necessary that the sick person be purged first with dissolvent medications.
Then cauterize him at the back of the throat near the root of the tongue in a depressed place. And beware lest you come too close with the cautery to the throat, nor to the skin, except a little of it.
Then cauterize him with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra, ending it. And let the cautery be a nail-shape, as was done before.
Then cure him with that which came before, until he is healed.
Of the manner of cauterizing for diseases of the Lung and Cough.
When cough and disease of the lung are from cold humors and the patient is not fevered nor consumptive, nor long suffering: then cauterize him with two cauteries above the armpit in depressed, gentle, vacant places. And another cautery on the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be a tube-shape, as was done before.
And if you wish your cautery to be a piercing with the instrument called "Punctum", whose shape was shown before in the piercing of ear pain, and let there be points from thirty points until it reaches to others.
Then cure him with that which came before, until he is healed.
And now let the cautery be one having three branches, according to this shape. Why is it alleviated with that cautery, when you do with it instead of one, three cauteries.
Chapter XXVII.
When the arm is dislocated because of humidities and does not return to its place in an hour from being dislocated, until it becomes his habit of returning, then is dislocated by a small movement which happens as we have already proved that, you must first reduce the dislocation. Then the patient shall be placed on his back, or on a healthy side. Then lift the scalp, which is in the inner part of the skull to the top with the fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated to the inside.
Then take a cauterizing iron having two horns. Whose shape is this.
Then cauterize the scalp until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cauterizing will come with four horns.
And sometimes a cauterization is done with an iron having three horns, therefore the figure of the cauterizing then becomes six horn-like projections: and the horns are tested for fineness.
And this is the shape of the cauterizing iron having three horns.
And sometimes one more is added in this manner, therefore there are eight cauterizers.
Then place over the cauterizing iron crushed thorns with salt. Then make the patient calm down, so that the member does not move at any time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is to the top, and it rarely happens, then cauterize it on the shoulder with a key-shaped cauterizer, or with many-pointed cauterizers.
For the joint is strengthened and moisture is removed, and the patient becomes healthy.
¶ On how to cauterize the Stomach.
When coldness and much moisture occur in the stomach until they draw it out of its complexion, and multiply phlegm to it, and frequent methods of treatment do not help: then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and extend his legs and hands. Then cauterize with three cauterizers: the cauterizer under the earlobe of the size of one finger with the key-shaped cauterizer, and two cauterizers lower down from both sides each one cauterizer, until the figure of the horns becomes triangular. And lengthen it between both so that they are not joined together, when they make a discharge.
And let the depth of the cautery be the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be according to this shape without addition; and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach, according to this shape: and let the cautery by which this cautery is made be one according to the figure of a circle, according to this shape.
And the stomach is cauterized by piercing it with that which is irritated by this cautery; and it is, as signs are marked on the stomach in the quantity you wish with encaustic: then cauterize him with a cautery of a point: then heal him with the treatment that preceded until he is healed.
Of the manner of cauterizing the spleen, cold.
When the pain occurs in the spleen from coldness and moisture, or from thick phlegm, until it goes out of its natural complexion with a superfluous discharge, and the sick person is cured with what we said, but it does not benefit them: then it is necessary that the sick person be laid on their back on their own neck, and signs be marked with encaustic three cauteries according to this shape, and this quantity the same over the spleen below the hips, where the man's knee reaches; and let the space between every cautery be according to the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be straight according to the length of the body; and do not press your hand with the cautery too much.
And let the quantity of what is burned be according to the thickness of the skin, half of that without addition; and let the sick person stand on their own feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already extended his legs and lifted up his arms.
This is the form of a cautery.
And indeed it is possible for you to cauterize with this cautery and a surgical knife, when you have fineness and prudence in the art.
And take care that you do not finally proceed with the cauterization, and the thickness of the skin is completely burned, so that the whole body is burned and comes to the intestines: for the skin there is thin, therefore you know this.
On the manner of cauterizing boils on the liver.
When an issue occurs and you wish to know if it is a boil on the liver itself or on its covering: then if it is on the liver itself, it invades the patient with severe pain and weight without sharpness: and if it is on the covering of the liver, with pain there is sharpness and vehemence: and already you see that its treatment has wearied his physicians.
Therefore it is necessary for the patient to lean back over their own head. Then mark the place of the boil with resin, then apply a burning cautery that resembles a rod. And this is its form. And cauterize with it a single cautery until the skin is burned completely and comes to the spleen, until all the pus issues forth: then cure the issue with the treatment of issues, until it heals.
And it is not necessary for this type of cautery to be used, except by one whose study in the art of medicine extends long, and through whose hands those afflictions come with some experience: then indeed let them dare to perform such an operation.
But rather to leave it alone, for me it is better.
On the manner of cauterizing in pleurisy.
The ancients said that a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia should be used for cold pleurisy in this manner. And take from the roots of long, dry aristolochia one root longer than those which are found in it, and as thick as the thumb. Then immerse it in oil and set it on fire. Then cauterize with a cautery one in the place between the fork of the neck and the collarbone, and two small cauterizations somewhat inclined downwards towards the part that is under the beard.
And two small cauterizations also in the place between the fifth and sixth ribs inclined downwards towards the back a little; and another cautery in the middle of the chest and one above the stomach. And three cauterizations from behind: one in the place that is between two spades; and two small cauterizations from both sides of the chest, with the lower one being in the place that is between two spades.
And it should not be necessary for you to compress your hand with the cautery, rather let it be visible and emitting a skin-smelling odor.
And some old ones have said that there are men who use a cautery of iron similar to a reed and set it on fire, and then insert it into the place between the ribs until they reach the boil and pus issues forth: just as we said concerning the boil of Epatic.
But in this piercing with a cautery there is danger, that either the sick person dies immediately or a fistula occurs in the place which does not have healing.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the Spleen Chapter XXXII.
When you are treating the pain of the spleen, with what we said concerning treatment in the division of pains, and your treatment does not take effect, then a cautery is applied to it in three modes, all of which are straight.
One of these is that you make three cauterizations, or four lined ones along the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of Epaticus, whose figure precedes this one.
And let it be between all cautery a quantity of finger thickness, or more or less.
And let the mode of cautery be what we have said to be used for cauterizing the liver equally.
And do not compress your hand with the cautery, and let the patient lie supine on his back.
And another mode of cautery is: that you have a fire cautery with two horns, as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the arm; and lift up the skin which is over the spleen directly where the left elbow of the patient reaches; and let your elevation be according to the breadth of the body, so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two very hot horns into the patient, until with them you pierce the skin on one side; then withdraw the cautery; thus four cauteries are formed.
And if you wish to cauterize with a cautery having three horns.
Then take care of the cautery after you let it discharge pus for many days, since it is more beneficial than any remaining thing that has preceded in treatment.
Of the mode of cauterizing in dropsy.
The cautery does not fall in dropsy, unless it is properly applied.
When you are treating dropsy with the modes of cure which we said in the division, and the treatment does not confer, then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, and one over the stomach, and another over the spleen, and two behind the spine, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach: and let the quantity of depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the open cautery so that it may discharge pus for a long time.
And they should not exclude an ailing person from treatment after cautery, for it is necessary that two intentions concur with him, and healing will hasten to him with the aid of God.
The form of cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be a iron spike, according to its own form, and that with which the back is cauterized, an olive-shaped one, according to its own form.
On the manner of cautering feet and legs.
When they become suppurated and are filled with greenish water, it is necessary to cautery over the dorsum of the foot in the notch, which is between the auricular and annular bones; and lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it: then lift your hand and repeat this absolutely not.
For greenish water will flow out, and the cautery should be according to this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg, and the cautery with a cutting-point cautery should be made; and one cautery should be made according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and another lower down near the middle of the leg; and above all the hip two cauteries: and leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time, so that some water may flow out from it; then treat him with the rest which we said.
On the manner of cautering in resolving an intestinal obstruction.
Chapter 35.
When there is a resolution of the intestines from coldness and dampness, until the vital and digestive powers, which are in the stomach and intestines, become weakened, and it is cured with modes of treatment but does not get well: and you see the patient bearing a cautery of great virtue, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach, according to what was done in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four small cauteries around the navel with a thin iron spike cautery, and a large cautery over the groin above the hip or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moistures, and the patient endures them, then burn him with a cautery on the chest, and with a cautery over the whole hip: and perhaps add two small cauteries near the great belly.
For it is a good treatment, whose benefit does not err.
About the method of burning hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are old and many hemorrhoids, or one, which are thick with cold humors or corrupted moistures, and are treated as we said in the division, and the treatment does not avail: then burn him with three cauteries on the lower part of the back of the spine near the scapula a little triangularly, and with a cautery under the navel almost two fingers deep.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and his food is not digested, and you see his face become inflamed, then burn him on the stomach with a large cautery, in the manner described before: and on his liver and another on his spleen with a key-shaped cautery: and leave the cautery open for some time: then care for him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you cut out the hemorrhoids, then ignite a cautery resembling a reed. Then insert the ignited cautery into the cut out hemorrhoid, and with your last hand guide it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows: do this once or twice.
If therefore there are many hemorrhoids, then burn each one with a cautery according to what we have narrated. Then care for them, with that which you apply to them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery on the scrotum, it is more extreme in treatment.
On the manner of cauterizing fistulas in the anus.
Chapter Thirty-eight.
When the sick person does not obey surgery and the operation which we have described in its place, and is frightened by it, perhaps he will be healed with a cautery.
When therefore an abscess occurs to someone, and suppurates, the pus flows out from it, and corrupted humors are discharged. Therefore what is necessary and fitting is that you probe her with a thin reed. Then know the depth of it with the reed.
Then ignite the cautery, which is similar to a rod. Then insert yourself into it ignited inside the fistula and to the depth in which the rod has entered.
And iterate over it the cautery, until all the corrupted bodies are burned, once, or twice, or thrice, according to your necessity.
And take care to avoid burning the nerve, if there is one there, or a large vein; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder, or into the body of the intestine; then be careful about all those places.
And do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed and material has been cut away from it, and remains so for a long time: then you will know that it is now completely healed.
And if material does not dry out from it, then you will know that it is penetrating, or there is a corrupted bone in its depth, or something like those: whose remembrance will come to the place itself.
On the manner of cauterizing kidneys.
When there occurs a pain in the kidneys due to cold or from a thick congestion and it is diminished because of the patient's weakened constitution, then it is necessary that you cauterize it on alum over the kidneys, with a caustic on the entire kidney along with a key-shaped caustic, whose preparation has been previously mentioned.
And perhaps we shall cauterize it again on the alum itself. Why three lines will come. So they will be more beneficial for healing.
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness and softening of the bladder occur from cold and moistures, until the infirm person is unable to retain urine, then you shall cauterize it in the lower part of the abdomen over the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin, and with a caustic on the right side of the abdomen and another on the left; and let the length of this cauterization be according to the size of a thumb's knuckle: and you shall cauterize it with an inferior dorsal caustic, or with two caustics, if need be; and in accordance with what preceded, use a key-shaped caustic.
On the method of cauterizing the uterus.
When coldness and moistures occur in the uterus, and are prevented from conception because of it, and its menses become corrupted, and their coming is delayed, and she suffers pain at their arrival, then it is necessary that three caustics be placed around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and a caustic on the lower back below the loin, or two caustics: and let the key-shaped caustic be used.
On the method of applying a cauter to an Achlam in case of dislocation.
When the mucous humors are discharged to the Achlam and it is caused to be expelled from its place; and the sign of this is that the crus extends over the other when they are placed together: and the location of the dislocation is found in the empty space.
Therefore it is necessary that you cauterize the ailing part over the Achlam itself with a similar cauter circle: after you have marked with encaustic around the edge of the Achlam, as it turns round: and so that the Achlam itself falls in the middle of the circle.
But if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize the Achlam with three cauteries, using a large oil cautery: and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of thickness of the skin of the whole.
Then care for it until it is healed.
On the method of applying a cauter to sciatica.
When pain occurs in the Achlam and coldness and humors are its cause: and the patient is treated as we said in the division, and the cure does not come about and it worsens: then it is necessary that you remove the ailing part from thick humors with stinking pills, or with artificial pills, and similar things. Then cauterize him.
And the method of applying a cauter to it is according to two modes: either a cautery with burning medicines, or a cautery with fire.
A cautery with fire is in accordance with many methods.
One of them is to cauterize above the Achlam itself with three triangular cauteries, according to this shape. And make a depth good, or bad in them. And let the space be what is between every caustic of the thickness of a finger, and let the caustic be oily.
However when it happens that a caustic is put in the middle over the top of the head itself. Why are there four caustics.
And if you wish to cauterize with a circle, whose form preceded in the cauterizing of dislocations also, one: that it may be a circle containing the whole head.
And burn the thickness of the skin entirely.
This is the method of cauterizing sciatica, when the pain adheres to itself and does not extend as far as the hip and thigh.
But if it extends as far as the hip and thigh, then you will cauterize it with two caustics over the hip, over the place where the ailing person points there, in which is the pain, and burn your caustic on the hair of four fingers to the western part for a little while: and let the caustic be a knife-like one.
And let the depth of the caustic be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
But if the ailing person indicates that the pain extends as far as almost to the fingers of the foot, then you will cauterize it there where he indicates with a pointed caustic, three or four, or more if needed.
And if he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, then you will cauterize it there with a knife-like caustic.
And beware of you in every cauterization of yours, that you do not burn with a caustic to this extent so as to burn the nerve, or a large artery, and bring evil or harm through it upon the sick person, or a contraction.
And indeed I have seen one or the other of those who cauterized over the hair and went too far in the cauterization, and it has become swollen with a tumor that reached the foot, and it was perforated and entirely corrupted: then there followed a dissolution of the belly, and death after this.
If there is pain in two places at once, cauterize both in this manner.
And some wise men have said that even a barber can do cauterizing, with this method of cautery being his way. Make a similar iron spatula with a diameter of half a fist: and let it be at its mouth according to the thickness of a thumb nail, or slightly less: and within that spatula let there be another spatula.
And let the space be between each spatula equal to the thickness of a thumb knot: and let the spatulas be open on both sides: and let their height be as a knot, or two knots: and make for them a handle from iron well suited to the spatulas.
Then it should be heated in the fire until it reddens and spits out sparks: then it is to be put over the barber's cauldron, beside a patient lying on their healthy side. Therefore cauterize him with three round cauteries in turn one after another.
Then leave it alone for three days. Afterwards, apply ointments with butter and let the open wound remain many days. Then cure him with a balm until he is healed.
Albucasis says, we have been sparingly using this kind of cautery, because of the terror of its appearance, and therefore that few are found who endure it.
However it is a good cautery for one who endures it and finds a suitable place with it.
However the cautery with medicines set on fire is like this: you make two spatulas having a ring-shaped hole, into which descends the hinge of its door from iron or air, the length of a wall: and let the height of them be as two knots, or just so.
And let the space between both be equal in thickness to a finger, and they are open below and above: and it is so that they contain themselves together, according to this form.
Then place it upon a chest with a lid, an invalid lying on his back on a sound side. And compress your hand very much over the chest with a lid. Then pour between the two circles water that is warmed a little with fire, and hold it for the space of one hour; and let the invalid endure its burning and scalding, for he finds the burning as if it were fire, until the burning ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the warm water from the chest entirely with fresh water; then let it be for three days.
And place on it butter, until the blackening of the scalding is removed; and let it be for some days, and pus will come out from it. For indeed it is a remedy for the last stage.
Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
But if the pain extends as far as the hip or thigh, make for him a statue in it that contains water, according to what you did on the chest equally.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of medical treatments. Take alkali and burnt lime, both equal in quantity, one part of each; pound them well, and put them in a new pot, the lower part of which is pierced with a small hole, according to the size that will allow water to flow through it: and put under the bottom of the pot another unglazed pot: and pour over the alkali and lime fresh water, which will cover both by a finger's breadth: after which you compress them well with your hand in good compression; and leave the pot until the sharp water descends into the lower part of the unglazed pot.
Then gather all that water and pour it over another lime; and let it settle until it clears again.
Then it will be very sharp and keen, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterizing of other members. Because it brings about the operation of its own fire.
And there are medicines with which joints can be cauterized, even as the thistle, and honey of a nut called acharium, and limestone with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And Galen himself reported telling of the cure of a certain man from among the ancients, by which he was cured of the pain in his joints and the vein of Sciatica; and he highly praised its being very great. And he said that he did not need another cure, and that he was cured in one instance, until he reported this, because perhaps he himself had entered the bath carried, and had come out of it already healed.
And it is to be taken from the green sap of the seitarag plant; and if it cannot be found green, dry but fresh is taken: and it is rubbed well with a bit of fat, and placed over the joint where there is pain, or the leg, or in the hip: and it is bound on, and left for a period of three hours, or until the sick person feels relief from the burning. Then put him into the bath.
When therefore sweat breaks out on his body, put him onto a couch. For the pain departs and he is healed.
And know that it is not right for anyone to use a cautery with these medicines, unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides also said that goat dung, when it is used to cautery the vein of Sciatica, cures him; and it makes a cautery in this manner. There is taken wool and it is steeped in old oil, and it is put over the deep place, which is between the big toe and the ankle bone, and it is closer to the ankle bone.
Then take dried sheep dung and ignite it until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on wool and leave it until it is extinguished. Then repeat the process. So do not stop doing this until a feeling of warmth reaches as far as the navel and the pain is quieted.
And that method of cautery is called calx (or) Vaccinum.
Of the cautery of pain of the back.
And sometimes a pain occurs on the back from many causes, or by chance, or from a blow, or from an excessive discharge, and similar things, due to the infusion of cold and moist matter: and in this case indeed cautery does not fall unless in this single form, which is made from the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore after the discharge of the patient with pills made from foul-smelling things and similar ones to be placed on the back where there is pain, three lines according to the width of that part should be drawn, after signs have been marked with encaustic in each line five cauteries or more as much as the strength of the patient tolerates: and a cauterization should be done with cauterizing points.
And if you want, cauterize three or four times with a middle-sized cautery stick, in this form.
Of the manner of cauterizing in the beginning of swelling.
This affliction often occurs in small children.
And the sign of its beginning is that it occurs on them as a swelling above the breathing at elevation and movement: and in the last vertebrae of the back and their knots, which already begin to protrude over the other vertebrae.
When therefore you see it and want to do this, then cauterize it with a cautery that is a circle in this form.
And he should take the cauterizing iron over the entire back part of the spine equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the spine with the cauterizing iron, two or three points, making sure they are close together.
Then cure the place, until it heals along with what we said.
And beware that you do not administer caustic to a hump that forms due to a spasm of the nerve.
Of the method of cauterizing for Gout, and pains of joints.
When the pains of the joints are from cold and damp humors that flow to any part of the body, then when these pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call that Gout properly.
Therefore, when Gout caused by cold is cured with the methods of treatment and the pains are not removed, then cauterization removes them.
And it is to cauterize him after evacuation around the joint of the feet with many cauteries and that the caustic be olive.
And if you wish to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointy caustic. But if the pains ascend as far as the knees, or to other joints, and it often happens that way, then cauterize him over the entire knee with three cauteries, or four from every part, with the same caustic of Clavus.
But if you need to use more of this caustic, then cauterize him again. And do not immerse your hand in the caustic, rather it should be so thick as the thickness of the skin.
But if the pains ascend to the knees and the back, then administer what we said from the caustic in Chapter its own.
But if the pains are only in the hands, then make points around the fingers, as two lines turn.
If, however, there remains pain from wounds in fingers, then prick them with a needle over every swelling, and over the wrist of the hand.
If, however, the pains ascend after days to the elbows or to the shoulders, then cauterize both sides from all parts.
And do not discharge the sick person from good regime, from receiving medicines. For if a good regime is done, and the mucus is discharged, with God's help the patient will be cured with this cauterization.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing for ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and descends into the intestines or the scrotum to the testicle, and it is beginning to come near: then it behoves you to command the patient to abstain from food on its day. And let him use gentle remedies, so that dung may descend from his belly.
Then have him sit between your hands on his back: and command him to hold his breath, until it issues out, or the scrotum or intestines become apparent.
Then reduce it into place with your fingers, and mark with encaustum below the rupture over the opening of the scrotum, with a sign whose extremity is similar to half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then burn with fire a cautery of this form, until white, and it spits out sparks. Then reduce the intestines or scrotum to its natural position. Then have the attendant place his hand on the place, so that the intestines do not come out: and you have already opened between the patient's thighs, and placed under him a mattress, and another servant above his knees, and another above his chest who is holding his hands.
Then place the cautery on top of it, with your hand standing straight with the cautery. And hold him fast until you reach with him the mouth: or go on with him another time, if you are not successful with him at first up to the mouth.
And carefully observe from the exit of the intestines at the time of your cauterisation, lest you burn it and a bad event happens through that on the patient, or death, or great harm.
And know that when you are not successful with the cautery in reaching the mouth, your operation is not beneficial.
And it should be a slender cautery for children, according to their size.
Then care for him with the other ointments until he is healed.
And let the patient be lying on his back for forty days, until the wound is covered.
And it should be that you put his food according to the length of time of his cure, so that it relieves his belly: lest he go out with diarrhea and vomiting.
Then when he wants to rise after forty days, then administer a well-made bandage and keep him for forty other days.
And he should be spared from labor, and filling with food and drink, and violent speech.
For when he uses this regimen, thus is he healed with whole healing.
And I say the cure of Ruptures with incision in his chapter.
When however the Ruptures occur in the rest of the belly and are beginning to be, and you wish not for them to become worse, then cauterize his rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let that which is burnt from then on be like a third part of it. Then care for him, as we have said, and he will not become worse.
And some of the first said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, in this shape.
After it is signed with wax and a line is placed which is through the width on the upper side of the rupture and another line below. And place your hand in the middle with a key cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
About the way of cauterizing for pains from a fall, or blow.
Chapter 48.
When it happens to some members from a fall or blow, and the pain persists for a long time, and care does not improve with medicines; then it is necessary that they be cauterized with a puncture cautery.
And let the cautery be of every member according to its size and weakness, and its smallness, and its weakness, and its power, and the location of the twisting and pain from it.
Therefore if it is healed from the first cautery, that is good. If not, then repeat on it a second cautery.
Because of the habit of these pains is to change from member to that which approaches it. Therefore you must pursue them with a cautery until the sick one is healed.
About the way of cauterizing for Leprosy.
The lepers however are sometimes relieved by cautery with great relief. And especially the kind of leprosy which occurs because of the corruption of phlegm and melancholy; so when you wish to cauterize it, consider this.
If therefore the leprosy is beginning and you have cured it with what we said in division, and it does not descend nor remain; and you fear for the sick one that corruption will encompass his whole complexion: then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries; one in the middle of the head marked, and a second below that towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two above both horns, and one behind on the back of the neck.
And with the last of your hands and a cautery, touch it for a little while until it impresses on the bone a small impression, and the outer coatings are dislodged from it; so that the exhalation of thick vapors from it may be alleviated, and cauterize also with a cautery over the spleen itself, according to what has gone before.
But if the leprosy has already spread over the infirm person and appears manifestly: then it is necessary that he be cauterized with those cauteries which we said in the head, and one on the tip of the nose, and two on the cheeks, and two on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one above the joints of the tail and another above it, at the almeidati: and two on the flanks: namely one on the entire flank, and two on the knees: one on the entire knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the calves, and two on the tendernesses of his chest: and he should be cauterized over the entire junction, from the joints of his hands and feet, and he should be cauterized on the entire heel of his feet, and the palms of his hands.
And take care that you do not burn the nerves which are over the posterior part of the heel.
And when he is cauterized with a cautery on the breastbone, and another on the ribcage, and another on the liver.
And know that as much as you add a cautery is so much more beneficial, and so much more helpful.
And know that the infirm person does not find pain in the cautery as those who are healthy do: therefore his body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of great size and smallness according to the members and joints: according to what preceded from the kinds of instruments.
Then cure the cautery with flour of the herb with honey, and the rest of the care, until it heals.
A chapter about how to cauterize in a stupor.
When some member is numb and is cured with medicines, and oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the numb member with cauteries, according to what its magnitude or smallness deserves.
And let your cautery be inserted a little way into the thickness of the skin. Then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
And sometimes it is cauteryed for a numbness which occurs to the hand and foot, in the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that limb; and the numbness is removed.
But one should not presume to do it over that, unless he is wise about the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves moving the body.
Chapter 51.
When the elbow becomes inflamed and does not yield to anything from the arts of medicine: then cautery it with a deep cautery a little way, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its colour changes.
Then care for it with flour of herb, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossa, and the blood of a dove, and the blood of a hyrundine: each one part of these things; they are mixed together and applied to the place on a cloth, until it heals.
About the manner of cautering in a Cancer.
When the cancer is beginning and you wish to suppress it: then cautery it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as it rotates.
But wise men have said that it should be cauteryed with the last cautery in the middle.
But to me it does not seem so, for I fear that it will ulcereate, and I have already seen it so a few times.
And it is more correct to cautery it around its circumference with a circle, as we said, or with many cauteries.
About the manner of cautering on an Ulcer.
When someone has a wound and is delayed in healing because of an excess of fluid forming in it, or because the person is elderly and of poor blood, or because of time, and wishing to hasten the healing of the wound, then cauterize around its edges with many small punctures from cauteries. Then let him leave it alone. For itself will hasten with healing.
If however you wish to puncture it with a cautery, then make a fire cautery, the shape of which is this.
And place it in the middle of the wound until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery be from that which follows the sick part, so that it may ease the flow of pus.
Then care for it until it heals.
About the manner of cauterizing a corrupting ulcer.
Chapter 52.
A corroding ulcer is nothing but corruption of a walking member and it consumes the member itself: just as fire devours dry wood.
If therefore you see a corroding ulcer in a place which can tolerate the cautery with fire, then burn it with much fire, small and large caustics, according to what is fitting for that place where the corroding ulcer is.
Then cauterize it from every part until you eradicate all corruption and nothing remains of it altogether.
Then let it be for three days, and put over the areas that have been cauterized a pounded sulfur with oil until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption.
Then care for it with ointments producing flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days the flesh grows back healthy and uncorrupted, it is good.
And if not, then repeat the cautery over what remains of the corrupted places.
And the corroding ulcer is healed sometimes with sharp medicine. The wound itself rises in place of the cautery.
However, a cautery with fire is more speedy relief and I have already said that the cauterizing of it with sharp medicine is in a division; therefore take it there when you need it.
Concerning the manner of cauterizing on Clavus and Verrucae.
Chapter 55.
This suffering often occurs in the lower parts of the feet and is a thick, lumpy, filtered thing that hurts the foot.
And indeed there are two manners of cautery for it: a cautery with fire and a cautery with hot water.
But as much as it is with fire, that the fiery cautery be conch-shaped like a vulture's feather: which shall be made of iron, according to the quantity that contains a nail on all sides and has thin edges.
Then place it burning on the clavus. Then turn the hand with the cautery around the clavus until the cautery reaches the depth of the clavus: and let it be for three days until it begins to emit pus. Then apply a plaster to it with wild mallows crushed with salt: and let the plaster stay on it at night. For indeed it will be rooted out from its roots.
Then care for the place with a unguent that generates flesh until it heals.
But if they are not converted and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet: then administer to them a cautery with hot water: and it is, as you should take a tube from air or iron or from a vulture's feather: and place it over the clavus or althelul. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube: keep your hand steady and turn it back with compression on your hand for a little while, so that the edge of the tube imprints itself in the root of the clavus: and let the patient wait for a short time after the burning of the hot water, about one hour.
Then let him go, for the nail is taken out with its roots.
Do this with each one after another, until you come to all those that are in the body.
Then care for them after they have been taken out, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing for tremors.
When a tremor occurs to someone from cold in the nerve, or from quartan fever, or another cause: then it is necessary that you cauterize him with four cauterizations, or five on the vertebrae of his back, and between every vertebra you cauterize, and on his chest you cauterize, and above his stomach you cauterize.
For the tremor is calmed by an oily cautery, and speedily comes the health of the affliction of cold.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing for Albutar ( or Albathir).
Chapter 57.
And sometimes foul things are expelled from the body, that is, pustules, which are formed from corrupted gross materials.
It is therefore necessary at first, when they appear, that they be cauterized over the entire head of each pustule with a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, whose extremity has been set on fire. Or with the root of aristolochia, long. Or with a lentil cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized with ademanthal, at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner: and they do not increase: and the excess is broken up making them healthy again from it.
However it is necessary that it be done after evacuation with bloodletting.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing for a flow of blood from an artery into a wound.
A bleeding occurs from an artery which has been cut at the wound, which happens externally, or at the opening of a boil, or the burning of a limb with a cautery, and similar things: and it becomes difficult to sever him.
So when this happens to someone, then hasten with your hand to the opening of the artery and place your index finger on top of it: and squeeze it a lot until blood is pressed under your finger and nothing comes out from it.
Then place small and large oil-based cauteries in the fire, many in number: and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one, small or large, according to the wound and place where the artery has been disrupted, and place the cautery on the vein; after which you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the bleeding stops.
But if it is expelled when you lift your finger from the opening of the artery and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those that are prepared by the fire.
So do not cease to do that with one after the other, until the bleeding stops.
And beware, lest you burn the nerve which is there, and another evil occur on the sick person.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to stop the bleeding: especially since the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or with a cautery, as we said. Or by removal, when it has not been removed. For when it is extracted, its ends contract and the bleeding stops. Or it will be tied with a strong binding thread. Or medicines of their own property to stop the blood are placed on it and a compress with a binding constriction is applied.
Whoever administers his incision with a suture, and stitches with cloth or the arrangement of things pressing upon one another, and similar things, does not benefit him at all, unless rarely.
If however it happens to someone that neither a doctor nor medicine is present: then let him begin with the positioning of the index finger on top of the opening of his vein, as we have mentioned, and constriction thereof very strongly, until the blood from the upper part of the wound becomes stuck and above the artery. And let the finger not be moved, on top of it with cold water from a very icy place always, until the blood congeals and thickens, and is cut.
And meanwhile let him consider in himself what he needs from cautery or medicine.
On the incision, perforation, and bloodletting in wounds, and similar things.
We have already said in the First Chapter, that every affliction in which a burning cautery and a medicine are suitable to be applied together, and its occasions, its causes, and its instruments, and its forms of cauteries.
And I have placed there the chapters from the top to the foot.
And I shall proceed in this chapter by the same way, so that relief may be given to him who is seeking it, and his inquiry may be fulfilled.
And before I begin it, my sons, it is necessary that you learn what in this chapter is from fear of the same as in the first chapter about cautery.
And because of this it is necessary that there be caution in it more severe, since in the operation which is in this chapter, evacuation often occurs with blood, with which life stands at the opening of a vein, or an incision on an aposteme, or the opening of an exit wound, or the treatment of a wound, or the extraction of an arrow, or an incision over a stone, and similar things: from all of which a tremor and fear arise, and death occurs in many of them.
And I warn you, that it may not fall upon you this thing of doubt, for sometimes falls upon you in this art the manners of men with manners of infirmities. For from them is he who is angry with his sickness, and death is light to him: because of the vehemence of that which he finds from his infirmity and the length of his malice. And when sickness is from fear that signifies death.
And from them is he who gives his physician and enriches you with him, hoping for health, and his sickness is deadly.
Therefore it is not fitting that you should agree to him who comes to you of this sort, whose manner is such. And let your caution be more vehement than your greed and your avarice. And do not presume over anything from him, unless after certain knowledge which verifies to you that thing to which comes a praiseworthy outcome.
And take care in the treatment of all your sick patients, with prognosis and indication of that to which it is fitting for them to be saved.
For in this indeed is aid to you towards the acquisition of reputation and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with his understanding, and not take away from you direction and inspiration: for it is in his hand.
And I myself have arranged this Chapter distinguishing by chapters, according to what preceded in the chapter on Cauterization, from head to feet: so that it may be alleviated for you the thing which you seek from it and wherein you are in need.
About the cure of water that is accumulated in the heads of boys.
Chapter I.
Know that this illness often happens to boys at birth: or when the midwife constricts the boy's head without gentleness.
And whenever it happens even from a hidden cause which is not known.
And I myself have not seen this affliction in any others except in children, and death has hastened for all whom I saw. Therefore it seemed to me to abandon the treatment of it.
And I myself have seen a boy whose head was full of water, and his head swelled every day until he could not sit up on account of the magnitude of his head. And the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed either accumulates between the skin and bone, or it accumulates under the bone above the ear.
And the operation on him, if there is moisture between the skin and bone and an abscess is small, then you must make a cut in the middle of the head with one incision from side to side: and let the length of the incision be as long as two knots, until the moisture runs.
And this is the shape of a spatula.
If therefore the moisture is more increased and the abscess is greater, then make two incisions like these.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the folds of the head open on all sides, and the water presses down when you press it with your hand to the inside, and it does not conceal itself from you: then you must make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this manner.
And after making the incision draw out all the moisture. Then tie the incisions with bandages and lint. Then bind it over with wine and oil from above until the fifth day.
Then untie the bandage and care for the wound with threads and ointments.
And do not neglect to bind the head with ligatures. And feed the weak person with all dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another method of making an incision is, that you consider where it appears in what magnitude the swelling is, and the collection of water.
Because sometimes it is more on the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left.
So ascend with an incision to where you see the swelling and collection of water, and cut it as far as is possible for you.
And observe so that you do not cut the artery and a flow of blood occurs, and the patient dies from that hemorrhage with the evacuation of moisture.
Concerning the incision of arteries which are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When there occurs a swelling to the eyes or to the chest, and it is inflamed, and medical treatment does not bring relief: then the last treatment for this is an incision of these two arteries.
You must therefore when you wish to cut them, so that the sick person may scratch his head. Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries may appear. Then the sick person should bind his neck with any of his cloths. Then look where you may feel the pulse in the vein. And those places of both are the places that are behind the ears depressed: and they are rarely hidden, except in some people.
Then mark with wax on both, and cut both with a spatula from both sides carefully, the incision arriving at the mouth, and let it be that way by the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery, and cut it upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be as two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood issues forth with a pulse-like emission, which leaps within frequently.
If however the artery does not appear to sense, then it is necessary that measurements be taken from the ear of the space of three fingers. Then mark with encaustic and search until the mouth.
And what needs to be let out of blood is six inches, and perhaps you let out more or less from it. The whole thing according to the quantity that appears to you from the weakness of the patient and the filling of his artery.
Then consider towards the wound. Then if something remains at the bone from seepage, then cut it so that a warm gangrene may not occur; then tie the wound with ligatures of linen cloth.
Then care for him with an ointment until he heals.
Concerning the extraction of arteries which are in wounds.
Chapter III.
When an old hemicrania or acute catarrah occurs in man on account of acidic humidities and heat in the arteries of wounds, or old soda which is gentle and similar to these: and it is treated with the modes of medical cure, and no benefit is conferred by this: then we are experienced in these afflictions that extraction of the artery from the wound, or cauterization of them, as we have narrated.
And the method of the operation in their extraction is that the patient must shave the hairs which are in the wound, and extend to the artery appearing in the wound. For it itself is shown to you from its pulse, and it rarely conceals itself unless in a few men or in great coldness.
If it conceals itself from you, then the patient should tie his head with any of his cloths; afterwards scrub the place with a rough cloth. Or warm the place with hot water until it appears to you in clear appearance. Then take a spatula which I formed a little while ago. Then peel off with him the skin with ease until you reach the artery. Then insert a probe into it and draw it upwards until you extract it from the skin and make it escape from all the tunics that are under it.
But if however the artery is thin, then wrap it around with the extremity of the probe. Then cut out from it a part according to the size in which its extremities stretch and contract, so that there may not be a flow of blood. For if it is not cut and if it is not severed, the blood does not rise up completely.
Then drain out six ounces of blood up to three.
Which if the artery is great, then it is necessary that you bind it in two places with thread double, strong, from silk: or from cord of hippopotamus, so that the putrefaction does not rush to it before the consolidation of the wound, and a flow of blood occurs.
Then cut away the superfluity which is between the two ligatures. Do that at that hour, or after another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a knife-like cautery, until its extremities are cut and remain in place as is the same work.
And it is better work, unless the sick person has a fever or a warm complexion. Because the cautery is from things that help to dry up humors. So it is a better treatment.
And it is necessary after the removal of arteries, that the place be filled with old catgut and well-made poultices be put on top.
And after the suppuration it should be treated with dry medicines that make flesh to grow and with liniments until it heals.
Which if in the meantime while you are operating a flow of blood occurs from the artery, then hasten to cut it off with a cautery, or that you fill the place with zege and bind your hand until the blood is cut off. If there is nothing among these remedies present for you, then place on top of the place of your finger until the blood coagulates. And bind up the place with water of very cold heat, until the sharpness ceases and becomes tightened as it should.
And from that which is lighter and easier in the extraction of the artery, this is, that you cauterize the vein with a cautery having two knives: and let the sharpness of the two knives be similar to that of an emerald. However they are much less in sharpness than two knives. Because if they are sharp, like two knives, the cold rushes to both quickly: and they do not cut the flesh with speed. Therefore since there is a little thickness in them, heat of fire remains in them and the flesh is cut quickly with this therefore it is better than any work, and easier, and more readily done.
And this is the shape of the cautery.
And let the space that is between the two knives be the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with encaustic, and lay them both burning very hot until they reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places: so that what is between its extremities is lengthened. For they are not completely closed with this cautery.
Chapter IV.
Concerning the care for a constant flow of sharp tears from the eyes.
When there is a constant flow of tears and the course of them comes from the veins that are over the outer part of the head: and no care of medical cure comes to them with medicines, and you see the face of the infirm person already red, and they feel on their forehead a wandering, as if it were the walking of ants: and their eyes are emaciated, moist, so that the hairs around them have been eaten away by corrosion: and their eyelids are heated from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients needed in curing them this operation, and they called it the cure with a needle.
And you should order the patient to shave the hairs that are on his face. Then you should cut three incisions on the face equally spaced according to the length of the face: and the length of each incision should be almost two fingers long, and one incision should be equally distant from the middle of the nose in the center of the forehead, and the second incision should be according to the length a little above the movement of the arm, and the third equally distant on the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries which are on both sides. And stretch out your hand along the continuation of the two jaws, and let the space of all the incisions be the length of three joined fingers. And have a piece of sponge prepared for you, or many dry cloths with which to stanch blood.
Then insert the spatula of the two sharp-edged ends, whose form will soon follow. From the incision that is on the side of the eyebrow, as far as the second incision: and scrape off with it all the skin that is between the two incisions, along with the Siffak, which is above the eye. Then do this also from the middle incision as far as the second incision. Then pull out this spatula and insert into the first incision again another instrument which is called a sharp knife, from one side smooth, not sharp on the other side. And this is its shape.
And place the sharp edge of it against the attached flesh along with the skin, and the smooth side against the bone: and push it until it reaches the middle incision: and cut off with it all the veins that go from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continue up to what appears on the skin.
Then do this in the middle incision as far as the other incision.
And when an equal quantity of blood has flowed out, press out the places from clots of congealed blood.
Then place linen from old clay on every split and put over them poultices soaked in wine, oil or vinegar. And be careful that no hot abscess may occur.
And on the third day dissolve the ligament and administer a strong infusion with warm water. Then treat it with balsam ointment and other things by which wounds are healed; until it heals.
Chapter 5.
On the cure of sharp tears and catarrhs to the eyes from internal parts of the head.
When sharp, acute, constant catarrhs occur to someone, and you see that their eyes are emaciated, small, and already weakened in appearance: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall from them, and there is a sharp, piercing pain in the inner part of the head, causing sneezing: then take note of these accidents, that those materials and catarrhs do not come, unless from many veins.
And their better cure is this. And it is, to have the patient shave his forehead. Then make an incision in it, one wound in the middle of the forehead, or another a little to the side, and start with the left side to the right: and let the incision be up to the bone: and extend your hand from the elbows of the temples which move at mastication: until when the bone is uncovered: and dry out all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the wound with old clay or with linens from linen. Then bind it on top with poultices and soak the poultices with wine and oil, so that no hot abscess may occur.
And when you dissolve it and see that the hot abscess is already decreasing: then it is necessary to rub the bone until flesh begins to grow there.
Then the treatment of this with a regimen of excitation that makes flesh grow: as if you take two parts from wheat flour and four parts from colophony, and prepare from them an ointment, and it is administered at the birth of flesh in these wounds.
Chapter 6.
Regarding its cure which falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or similar to a stone, as iron and glass; or it is from a plant, such as chickpeas and beans; or it is a flowing thing, as water and vinegar and things like them; or some animal.
When therefore a stone falls into the ear, or a kind of stone from among those that do not add or grow within the ear, expose the ear to the sun: if then you see the stone, then distill something from violet oil, or siseum [sesame] into the ear. Then administer an extraction of it [the stone] and make him sneeze with a condiment, and stop up his nostrils near the arrival of sneezing, after you have placed fragments of cloths or wool around the ear, and stretched out the ear upwards.
For often it exits with this cure.
But if it does not exit, then administer an extraction of it with gesti, that is, fine pomegranate rinds; its form is this.
And so if it exits with the gesti, it is good.
And if not, then administer an extraction of it with a thin blind thread of fine silk.
And if it does not exit through that [gesti or thread], then make a tube of air and insert the end of the tube into the ear opening very much, and stop up what is around the tube with softened wax with oil, so that there is no passage for wind except the tube: then draw it out with your own breath, using strong suction.
Therefore it frequently comes out with him as we have said. But if it does not come out this way then take from the bird lime or from vetch, that is a prepared gluten with which birds are caught, a small amount: and place it at the end of the beam after you have wrapped over it a cloth placed decently: then insert it into the ear canal with ease, after you have dried the ear of moisture.
Therefore if it does not come out with all that we have said, then hasten to cut into it, before a warm abscess or spasms occur.
And the manner of making an incision is, that as a barbers cut the hair on the head first, and draw from it according to its strength. Then have the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear near the fat there in a depressed place itself, in the shape of a crescent moon, until you come to the bone: then remove it with that which is possible from instruments.
Then close the incision with your hand quickly and take care of it until it heals.
But if there is a thing falling into the ear from one grain which grows and swells: then administer its removal.
But if it does not obey you to come out, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this shape.
And administer with it the removal of that kind of thing from grains which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you put in many tweezers: then draw them out with a hook or with a subtle forceps or by suction, as we said, for the removal of it is eased.
But the water which enters into the ear ought to be used by the patient with sneezing after it has been seasoned first, and already filled his ear with a somewhat hot old wine: and he is lying on top of that ear in which is the water. If therefore it comes out through that one, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, as long as a finger, thin, soft, and heat them with fire for a little while, and the sick person should insert one of them into his ear hole, and let him urinate over his foot from that side, and strike with another stone on top of the one in his ear. Therefore he should not stop doing that with stones and stones until all the water comes out.
And now water comes out so that you take from a papyrus or a reed one, and insert the end of it into his ear, and burn the other end with fire until much of it is burned. Then repeat the reed again and do that many times until all the water comes out, and then draw it out with a pipe as was mentioned in the stone.
But in the extraction of the living creature entering into it, if it is small in body, such as a louse, and like to it, take care of it just as I said in the division.
But if it is of a large body that appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with forceps and tweezers: and its removal is easier for all that are held in the ear.
But in the extraction of the worm generated in the ear, when you cure it with that which we said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and your care does not help: then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sun. If therefore something appears there from worms, then draw that out with forceps or with very fine tweezers.
But if nothing appears there, then take a pipe, of which this is the shape, tight below, wide above: and insert the fine end into the ear according to what the sick person can tolerate: then suck with it strong suction. Do that many times, until all worms come out.
If they do not obey you to come out, then a small tube with honey, as I said on stone.
And if they do not come out with what we said, then administer the distillations which ancient ones have experienced in the removal of worms: and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your discharge be that which you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it from silver or bronze, lower part tightened, with a small hole at the bottom, wider above.
Let it be so that by pushing what is in the concavity of the tube, it comes out from well-made bronze. And if you wish, take a reed and wrap in it cotton in a decent wrapping: then pour oil or juice or what you will from those medicines into the tube: and it itself be in the ear: then insert the reed with the cotton on top, and press out by hand with temperate compression until oil flows into the concavity of hearing, and feels it inside the sick person: and that which is poured into the ear, be already warmed up a little with fire: and beware lest what is distilled into it is very cold: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
Concerning the care of the occurrence of goldsmith's burn.
And sometimes babies come out through their mothers' wombs unruptured.
And it also happens to some people that an obstruction occurs in the ear canal from a wound or a boil in it.
And this obstruction sometimes occurs in the deep part of the ear canal which cannot be seen, and sometimes it happens to the outer part of the ear canal which can be seen.
Those things that occur deep within the ear, and which the sight does not comprehend, are often difficult to heal.
And as for that which results from the sight, it is necessary to place the ear of the infirm person in the sun and look at it. Then if you see a visible blockage, open it with a small thin spatula whose shape is this: its extremity should have a small depth, where there is an acute part, and the rest of the spatule should be two smooth sides so that they do not harm the ear.
Therefore if the blockage is from flesh grown in the ear passage: then take hold of it with a small hook and cut it out with violent facility, until all the flesh is removed.
And if the blockage is deep within the ear: then take a small thin pointed probe and warm it with fire for a little while. Then insert it into the ear passage.
And if you feel the blockage with it, as the infirm person feels a heaviness of hearing, try to open it with facility: and beware lest you wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place a lint in the ear according to the size of the opening that you enveloped with Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days, until you are sure of the wound's consolidation.
Or take lint and immerse it in rose water, and powder saffron over it, and use it.
And if you see the ear already to be inflamed: then it is necessary for you to remove the lint and permit it with another cloth which you will wrap in cerate that has been made with rose oil, until the swelling cools down. Then care for it until it heals.
And if a bleeding occurs: then submerge a sponge or cloths in cold water and place them over it: and use the remaining cure which stops the flow of blood as described in the treatment of bleedings.
Concerning the care of the eyelids' corners.
Chapter Eight.
These swellings that occur on the eyelids of the eye are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore it is necessary to tie them with thread or with a needle, and to cut them off from their roots. Then place powdered vinegar on the places.
But if there is bleeding from them, then cauterize them with a delicate lentil-shaped cautery.
And it is better to cauterize them after an incision. For they often recur when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, the roots burn and do not recur.
Concerning the care of the cataracts of the eyelids of the eye.
Chapter Nine.
Often something occurs in the eyelids which is similar in strength and hardness to a cataract, and on account of this it is called a Grandium: and it is a thick gathering of moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower one.
Therefore the operation in them is to see then if it is a Grandium proceeding from it which appears on the eyelid and moves in every direction, and its nature is easy.
Then therefore find an incision over it by breadth. Then peel it off from every part with ease until it comes out. Then hang it with a needle and cut it off.
But if its removal is not prepared for you, unless after you have made an incision into the eyelid a little bit, then it will harm the sick person somehow.
Which if the incision is great, then sew it up with suture and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, no harm will come to you from it. The ointment restores it and makes it flesh again.
And if the stone is leaning towards the inner ear, towards the internal surface, then turn back the eyelid and hang the stone with a hook; besides which you will need an incision and press it from every side.
But if the eyelid is stretched by the incision, it will not harm it in any way.
Then wash the eye with salt water after the stone has been cut out, and take care of the place with that which makes it flesh again, until the sick person is healed.
Concerning the treatment for a swelling of the eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a fatty swelling that arises in the folds of the upper eyelid, and it most commonly occurs in children: and it burdens their eyes, and cataracts occur in them at morning time, and they are unable to look upon the light of the sun, therefore because tears flow towards them, and on this account you see them reclining on their faces always, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are moist under their eyebrows which have already been overlaid by swelling: and indeed the prominence of Axirnath appears to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers you feel Axirnath between them.
And the manner of operating on it is, that the sick person should lay their head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare in it lint, and make from this lint a circle according to the size that contains the Axirnath all around. Then place him on it and press with your fingers all around so that the Axirnath is gathered together in the middle of the circle.
Then prick into the center of that moisture with a splinter, making incisions through its breadth, and let it not be an incision deeper than is done by bloodletting.
You should find the skin to be intact, until you reach Azarnath; for indeed it proceeds from a fissure according to the shape of white fatty tissue.
Therefore draw it out with a cloth which you have infiltrated between your fingers on the outside; and turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses: and beware that you do not add anything in the fissure, lest you reach the white part of the eye and harm it.
But if however Azarnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then you should add a little into the fissure with ease until it proceeds. Then draw it out, as we have said.
Then soak the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the place, and bind it with bandages.
And there are men who rub salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure, so that what remains of moisture may dissolve.
Then care for it, until it heals.
But if a hot abscess should occur in the place, then cure it with soothing plasters until it heals.
Concerning the ways of Azarnath of the eye, that is, when the eyelid becomes soft, the eye becomes inflamed as it should not.
Chapter XI.
When hair sprouts out between the eyelashes, in addition to the natural ones, and become old: then they harm the eye and cause various sufferings, as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and a growth, until it comes to be the cause of destruction of the eye.
And indeed Azarnath of the eye is cured according to four methods. Either by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what is set forth in the chapter on cauterization. This is healed with an incision and stitching. Or by canals, according to what I say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the sick person on your shoulder. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
Therefore if it turns, it is well. And if not, introduce the needle into it where there is a thread from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle pass through with the thread on top, and let it be near the hair itself, that is, near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born: and pull the thread to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn it with a stick.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the hairs with the spatula running from the larger tear duct to the smaller one.
Then pull out the thread and place a small dust of ashes, or cloth, under the eyelid; then mark above the eyelid with wax, so that it be like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid, since it varies greatly among men.
For some of them are those who need that a great quantity be cut from the eyelid, according to the quantity which is softened by the eyelid.
Then with the spatula find above two lines which you marked, and start from the larger tear duct to the smaller one, and let there be a fissure one near the natural hairs, just as is the thickness of the stick.
Then insert the needle into one of the two angles of the skin. Then peel it off entirely. Then gather the two eyelids together with a stitch of needle and fine linen thread; and wipe away the blood, and make what overflows from the threads above the eyebrows adhere with some cauterizing things, if you wish to do so: and if not, don't bother.
Then let loose the suture and threads until three days, or four: then care for that.
And if you wish, let the wound go without a suture, and care for it with that which dries and tightens. For the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the wound and its gathering together: but the future one will be better.
This method of treatment the ancient Ataksir taught.
However, there is concern for the weak one, and it is from good surgery, and there is no fear in it.
And another method is in Ataksir also: and it is, to make signs on the eyelid a figure, which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated.
Then raise the eyelid with three separate or joined hooks, according to this shape which follows, then cut off what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this shape, with equal cutting.
But if it is not possible for you to hold the hook and it does not come out even: then take a needle with thread on it, and insert it in the middle of the shape: and insert another thread near the larger tear channel, and the second thread near the smaller tear channel: and gather together between your fingers the threads with equality.
Then raise your hand with equal elevation: and raise the skin above which is marked out, as we have narrated.
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and care for it, until it heals.
If, however, a suppurative formation occurs at your incision, or your cut: bind that suppurative formation with cerate and those similar things, from soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelid also, that its hairs turn.
Therefore you must use in it what we said concerning a cut: but to sew both of them is more artificial. On the care of an elephant wound with a thorn.
It is so, that you will turn back the eyelid and cut open the split that is inside, as I have told. Then make two thin sticks or canes by art, the length of which is according to the length of the eyelid and their width less than half that of a reed: and you have now cut them at both ends on both sides where you hold the threads.
Then bring both sticks together with subtlety over the excess from the eyelid of the eye and tie the two canes tightly on both sides with a strong knot, and leave it for some days. For the bound skin will die, become blackened, and rot until it falls of its own accord.
If therefore it is delayed, then cut it with scissors. Then care for it until it heals.
When therefore it becomes firm, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of the two canes which you will make according to this shape and quantity in length and width.
Chapter Twelve.
On the elevation of pricking hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation is this: you will take a thin needle and insert into it a fine thread of soft linen. Then bring together the ends of it and tie both with a very small knot, and let the length of the threads be one finger.
Then compose another fine thread under it in shortness, and tie its ends if you wish.
Then let the sick person put his head in your arm and be near the sun so that the operation may be declared; because it is a subtle or minute operation.
Then insert the needle with the Alinxotati under the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you draw out from above a natural hair.
Then pull out the arrow until it is above the level of the body. And insert that arrow into the body. If there be one, or two, or three, not more.
Then pull your hand along with it until the arrow comes out through the body into the eyelid together with its own natural thread.
But if the thread is pulled out and the arrow does not come out with it, pull the thread downwards along with the string that you made in it, until the thread comes out through the upper hole and you see it with the sight of the eye. Then pull the thread and the string and take both out, and close the eye and let it remain closed for two or three days, until the thread adheres to its place and new flesh grows over it.
And if the thread is short, then either join a long one to it from the natural hairs and lift them up together; or let it be until it lengthens over time, and then lift it up.
Chapter 13.
When this Alxa'tratus happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alxa'tratus is either natural or accidental.
The accidental therefore comes from the closure of a wound, or incision, or cautery, and similar things to these.
And the mode of operation for it is that you should find the closure itself, and separate its lids, and place a linen thread between them, and tie it until it heals.
And you should not use things that dry out and constrict for its treatment, because if you do it will make the Alxatrati worse than it was. But rather use things that soften, such as opium: and mix with water in which althea seeds have been cooked: and a diachylon ointment that has been liquefied with some oil: and wrap it around with the linen, and treat it with this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you strive with all effort, so that it may not harden, according to its original shape.
And indeed this operation which we said is nothing but a certain correction of the Alxatras [?], so that the shape of the place does not return entirely as it was.
On the care for Alxatras which occurs in the lower eyelid, and it is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter XIII.
This Alxatras which occurs below is truly called Alxatras. And it is natural and accidental.
And the accidental one occurs from a wound, or incision, or cautery, and similar things.
And the way of operating in it is, to take an awl, in which there is a double thread, and dye it in flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the skin upwards with the awl and cut it with a wide spatulum. If then the shape of the eyelid returns as is fitting, it is good.
And if not, take a needle and place it in the incision, and convert with it the eyelid: and make two cuts on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two cuts be from both angles of the incision, until they come together and form an angle: until when they are gathered it will be their figure, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh to the extent of its sharp lower side, from what follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: or sew them with a thread of wool.
Then treat them with those things which we said, about softening medicines, and liniments, until they are healed.
And if an eyelash has fallen out due to a cut, and stitching, or cautery: then it is necessary that you seek out the flat cut under the eyelid skin, even according to what happened before. Then separate between two lids with a lint or linen cloth, as we have said.
And the conclusion of the speech about the cure of Alxatrai, when it is above or below, is that the operation should be done according to the form of Alxatrai.
For indeed it has many differences in form and a wise craftsman prepares the tool with whatever means is possible to him until he makes the figure return to its natural form or close to it, and the infirm person himself, as becomes him from the operation and instruments in various dispositions.
Chapter 15.
About the sticking together of the eyelid with the conjunctiva, or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens to many people in such a way that the upper eyelid sticks together with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its own natural operations.
Therefore it is necessary that you insert the tip of a rod under the eyelid and raise it upwards, or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a thin spatula, which should not be sharp but slightly dull, so as not to disturb the patient during the operation and remove the spatula and hurt the eye with its sharpness. And let your incision be like you scrape off that adhesion easily, until when the eyelid returns according to its natural form and the whole adhesion is healed.
Then pour salt water into the eye with fresh water or distill a drop into it from a flask made from something dissolved in vinegar.
Then separate between the eyelid and eye with a lint or linen cloth, and place over the eye a woolen poultice soaked in egg white, and after three days use a flask and ointments until it is healed.
On cutting the nail and the elevation of a cutaneous excrescence of tears.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the nail is in two ways. Or it is fleshy, and is similar to skin, hard and thin. Or it is not fleshy, similar to frozen moisture; which when touched with an iron file, or you attempt to take hold of it with a nail, it breaks off and the nail does not stick to it.
And both kinds do not begin to grow, unless from the larger tear of the eye; until it gradually covers the sight, and prevents light, and motion of the eye.
And the manner of procedure in cutting it is: that the sick man places his head on your shoulder. Then open his eyes, and lift up his eyelid with your hand. Then gather the nail with a double-edged needle, and extend it upwards. Then take a needle and introduce into it a thread of horsehair or cow hair, or goat's hair: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle for a little while, and fix it in the middle of the nail; and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread, and extend it upwards; and excise with the thread the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were sewing it with the thread up to its end.
Then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear with a very fine spatula, or with small scissors; and let the natural tear flesh be left, so that there may not occur from it a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is extended with the needle alone, or with thread, as we said. Then it should be excised with a light spatula, whose shape is this.
And beware lest the spatula touch the corneal coat and a rupture occur in it, and the pupil be perforated.
Then after making an incision, throw some crushed salt into the eye, or something made from sifted alum, and let it be until another day. Then care for him with what is necessary until he is healed.
But if the nail is not inflamed and you cannot insert an awl into it nor a hook fastens to it, then this kind of nail is often cured with medicines and heals as I narrated in the division.
But if you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person and take a small, thin, weak, sharp knife, according to this shape. And scrape the nail from above with delicacy. But if you see that it becomes cracked and broken and the scraper sticks to it, then drop from your hand into the eye a thing made from sifted alum or red powder or crushed salt: and close the eye until another day.
Then repeat the same operation over it until everything is removed from it. Unless a contrary thing, a hot abscess, is in the eye: then indeed let it be and care for the abscess until it heals.
Then repeat the operation over it with a scraper, until it heals.
But the prominence of the eyelash, if it causes great harm to the eye, is suspended with a hook and an incision is made from it; and do not stop making the incision so that the flow of tears does not occur.
Then drop into the tear duct red powder or something made from alum until it heals.
About the incision of Alguarden and the flesh that forms in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
There is sometimes formed in the eyes of men a red flesh composition, or a growth that spreads until it covers the pupil, or approaches or tightens over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward, and it resembles a rose mallow.
And the operation for it is also this: that you place the sick person's head on your shoulder. Then open his eyes, and collect all that flesh together with the hook-shaped needles fitting for it; and hold that with a forceps or tweezers.
Then cut into the flesh first, until it is finished entirely with a razor. And beware of the eye, lest you hurt it during the operation; and let your cut be such as you are cutting with, or with a spatula, which we have mentioned in the incision of the nail: or with small forceps with which the sty is collected, according to how its shape will come out after this chapter.
When therefore your cut is completed and the entire growth removed, then fill the eye with pounded salt: or distill red powder into it and similar things from corrosive medicines; and place over the eye a poultice outside made with the white of an egg, in order that it may be secured from hot inflammation.
But if something remains of the growth and hot blood dominates over you and you fear a hot inflammation: then let go of the eye and cure it with what soothes an inflammation.
Then apply again on it with the operation, until it is healed.
And do similarly with added flesh which occurs in the eye from this kind.
However it is necessary that you refrain from treating any weak eye either naturally or accidentally by operating with iron; and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can tolerate that operation.
About the collection of a sty from the eye.
Chapter 18.
A sty is a red vein that grows over the eye and hinders its vision from operating properly; and weakens the eye with the length of days.
It is therefore necessary for you to consider first if the eye in which there is a sty is strong and not has any affliction other than the sty; then collect its sty.
And it is, that you may instruct the sick person, that they put their head into your arm.
Then suspend the veins with a single hook, or two according to your prudence; and let the hook be thin, like a fold, in this shape, or let there be two hooks graded in one body, in this shape.
Then collect with fine scissors those veins with delicacy, and wipe away the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being removed from sight, and be dissolved: and beware lest you hurt the eye with the extremities of the forceps.
And let your operation be at midday before the sun, and be firm in your operation very much: so that you do not slip except those veins.
And when you have finished, then apply to the eye either green or red, so that its sharpness eats away what remains of the vein.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it for some days, until the pain has ceased: and be protected from warm inflammation: then proceed over it in the same manner, until it heals.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
Of the reduction of a nasal swelling.
Chapter 19.
Doctors call the swelling of Arissat a fistula, which you cure with a cautery, or with burning medicine, according to its preceding account.
And if it does not heal, then there is no talent in it, unless you lay a thread over the abscess at its birth, and draw out all the moisture that is in it and pus, until the opening is revealed.
When therefore the opening is revealed, and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it out with an instrument, whose shape is this.
And it is called Apical fracture.
Let it be made from tempered iron and let its head be round like an azir, which has been punctured with a razor's puncture or the puncture of a thin awl; and place it on top of the corrupted bone.
Then turn it back and forth between your fingers, and you press your hand upon it for a little while until you know that the corruption is now smoothed out: and do this several times.
Then restore the place with drying and astringent medicines.
And if therefore the place is consolidated and flesh grows upon it, and a cure is followed: and remains for forty days and does not recur, and is not inflamed, and nothing untoward occurs there: then you will know that it is now healed.
And if not, then it does not have a natural tendency, except to reduce the fistula back into the nostril, according to this shape.
And it is, as you would uncover a second bone with iron or sharp medicine: and when the bone has been uncovered, then take a trephine according to this shape, let its iron part be triangular; and its wood part be a thinned-out pyramid to the end, just as you see.
Then place it over the bone itself: and let it be near the eye: and extend your hand from the eye a little. Then turn your hand with the trephine until it penetrates the bone and feels weak: through this because it finds air coming out from it, when it holds its hand over its nose.
Therefore then restore the place with drying and astringent medicines, just as I have taught you.
And when flesh grows and the place hardens: then the material that was flowing out to the outside returns to the nose: so it is therefore less troublesome for the invalid.
On the reduction of an elevated eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye itself is elevated and no injury or decrease in vision has occurred, then you must let blood from the patient; afterwards put poultices on his neck without incision, but with suction.
Then place over the eye a liniment made from acacia, and aloe, and oil of cinnamon, and wax. Then bind the eye tightly above with a poultice containing many powders.
And the manner of making the powders is this: take many soft cloths, and each cloth be doubled on itself four times; make many such things; then place one upon another, according as much as the eye requires; then bind tightly over them with a strong cloth.
And repeat the poultices with suction without incision.
Then take away the poultices and leave the eye tightly bound day and night.
But if the bandage becomes loose again, then it must be bound tightly; afterwards remove the bandage after a day and night, as we said.
Therefore if you see that the eye has returned to its natural covering, it is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, powders, binding, and poultices until it heals.
On the incision of the eyelid's skin fold.
Chapter 21.
When a disruption occurs in the eyelid's skin fold, and it elevates and protrudes beyond the lashes like a grain of corn, and it disfigures the face of man because of it, and you want to cut it: then the operation on it is as I say, and is that you insert a point (or needle) into the root of the eyelid from below upwards.
Then insert another point into the place where there are two threads from the corner of the tear duct, and make it penetrate; and leave the first point in its position.
Then cut the spot of the son's eyelid, and tie with him a thread of five ouches around the edge of the eye: and draw it tight.
Then take out the needle, and place over the eye a thread soaked in alum on the white part of the eyelid: and let him go until the thread falls with its five ouches.
Then take care of the eye with it, that it comforts itself, until the wound heals.
And whensoever the thread is drawn tight from every part with a circle of cloth, until the eye swells greatly.
Then a fine awl will be pierced into it, so that it reaches the depth of the eye, and the fluid from the white part flows out, and the eye descends, and becomes at once clear; then bind him until he heals.
Of the cure of the Alcornutia (or Hordeolum).
Chapter XXII.
This affliction which is called Alcornutia, is nothing but a pus which accumulates in the eye, similar to water flowing down, and it is not itself.
And the manner of operation in this case is, that you make the patient sit upon a prepared seat, or upright.
Then take his head in your hands from both sides, and shake it until you see the pus come out towards the lower parts of your eyes. Then it will stick and not come down, and the light will be released: and let the patient see what it looks like as he saw before; and if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
But if the descent of the pus does not prepare itself as we said, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a fine awl and pierce with it above the white part of the eyelid for a little while at the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the crown, until the pus comes out.
When it comes out, then let a warm water distill into the eye, in which you have mixed honey: or the water in which you have already boiled Egyptian linseed and honey: then care for him with the rest of the cure until he heals.
On the cure of water that descends into the eye, or a cataract.
Chapter 23.
We have already described the kind of water used for making an incision, and what is suitable for it; then take that same thing according to health.
Therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands square and facing the sun, near the sunlight. And bind his sound eye tightly and tie him strongly. Then with your right hand take hold of the eyelid of his left eye if there is water in it; or his right eyelid if there is water in it.
Then take with your right hand the almaga, if the eye is on the left; or with your left hand, if it is on the right.
Then place the extremity of the almaga near the crown, by the thickness of the radius visible in the whiteness of the eye on the smaller tear duct. Then push the almaga with force and you turn your hand with it until it penetrates into the conjunctiva of the eye: and you feel that the almaga has already reached the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the almaga to depth be the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness and that is the crown of the eye. For you will see it indeed in the very pupil by the clear vision of the corneal tunic.
Then place the almaga up to the place where there is water. Then press it downward with a gentle force, one part after another.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the patient will see it right away above which his vision opens up at once and the almaga is in his eye.
Then rest a little while. If therefore the water descends, then remove it secondly, apart from where the almaga comes out.
When therefore it is placed and does not rise: then extract the almond-shaped object with ease: and you revolve your hand slowly.
Then dissolve something from clear salt like a jewel in water, and wash the eye with it afterwards. Then place all the stuffing, or wool soaked in rose oil, and the white membrane of the eyelid outside the eye, and bandage with it a healthy eye.
But as for us, and those who are of our time, we place on top of it ground thyme with egg white.
Which if the almond-shaped object does not obey you for entering into the eye because of its hardness, since it is from men whose eye is very hard: then it behooves you to take a small spatula which is called Alberid, which has this shape.
Therefore pierce with it only the conjunctiva itself, and do not prolong your hand into the hole: and it is nothing but that you make a way to the place of the almond-shaped object subtle.
Then insert the almond-shaped object, as we have said.
And as a complement to your work, let a comfortable bed be prepared for the patient in a dark house: and prohibit all movements from him, and coughing: and place his food that which soothes his nature: and let him not move his head to the right, nor to the left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and try his sight: and make him see things. Then return the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do that in the hour of healing, or immediately after the incision: nay, it behoves you to remove it because water ascends quickly through a violent outlet.
If however a warm abscess occurs: then you must bind the eye for seven days, and correct it with that which calms an abscess until it is calmed; then without his will, and put on its face an oral mouthpiece by which its vision may be regulated over several days while he remains in that dark house.
Then he shall go out from the house gradually, and turn to his own places.
And know that in zeal a student is not excused from vision several times: then indeed he may dare to act on the operation.
And now indeed some have come to us from those who are from Alayrach, who said that in Alayrach a stomach was perforated, by which water is sucked.
Therefore truly I have not seen anyone on your earth who has done that: nor did I read it in any of the old books: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of species from a stomach, so that they may stand over him who ignores them.
They are to be made from bronze precisely: and their ends are to be triangular and pointed with the same subtlety.
Chapter XXIII.
On the care of Flesh formed on the nose.
Sometimes flesh grows on the nose of different kinds, from which is something that resembles a scorpion with many feet: and from it is hard cancerous flesh, stony in colour: and from it is soft flesh not dark coloured.
In that therefore which is from these soft flesh, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must have the patient sit between your hands opposite to the sun, and open his nostrils, and throw a hook into those flesh parts: then pull them outwards, and cut with what you have grasped of it with a sharp pointed instrument on one side, until you know that all the flesh is already removed.
If something remained from it whose removal is not possible: then scrape that with one of the fine instruments with ease, until nothing remains of it. But if blood masters you, or an inflamed abscess occurs: then put a stop to it with what is necessary; or if it is from malignant ulcers, then hurry and cauterize it, until the blood is drained off and all flesh is removed.
Then vinegar, water, or wine should be poured into the nose after the incision. But if the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then you should know that he is already cured.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that there is born flesh within the upper bones of the nose to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
So then it is necessary that you insert a linen thread with some thickness, and knot many knots in it: and place between each knot the length of a finger or less: and the patient will be able to send one end of the thread into the nose with a rod, or with what is possible for him after he has done this similar to a catheter: and pull out his stench, until it reaches the chest, and comes out over his throat.
And indeed children do this similar thing to the Attomy (catheter) often in schools: and it is an easy thing for whoever wants.
Then place the two ends of the thread, one end that comes out over the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then give him a meat-saw with the knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already cut along with the threads of the thread.
Then draw out the thread and place into the nose after the removal of blood a liniment that you have mixed with Egyptian ointment: do this for three days or more, until the ointment dissolves all that remains of the flesh.
Then place at the end of the thing a tube of lead into the nose for several days until it heals.
But if it needs treatment that dries it out, use that one.
To make the head purging vessel by which olive oil and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it from silver or copper, that it be like a small lantern, open as a shell is, and its channel similarly.
And if you wish to make a closed tube, like a reed.
And the shell of the instrument to be made for head purging should be full and hollowed out: which has a handle at its end, with which you will hold it when you heat in it oil or what you wish from juices and flowing things.
Chapter XXV.
A swelling often arises at the end of the nose and becomes large and grows with days until its appearance is foul.
And because of that it is necessary to burn it at the beginning of its appearance and to remove its roots entirely. Then place over the place either a cautery or a burning medicine which will take its place.
If therefore its cutting is delayed until it becomes large, then consider if it is stony, hard, dull in color, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous ulcer.
For I have often seen that when a surgeon cut into an ulcus which was become malignant, and it happened to him who had it that there came upon him a great misfortune.
And if the ulcer is soft to touch, not dull in color, and you see that its cutting is possible throughout it, then evacuate the patient and cut into it without fear, without anxiety: and treat the place with what dries and tightens until it heals.
Chapter 26.
On the suturing of the nose, and lip, and ear.
Know that when a separation of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is of little concern in the operation, unless in some men.
Therefore, when something happens to him that you should consider whether it is a recent wound with its own blood; and then gather the two edges of the wound together with a suture; thereafter take care of it until it heals.
And if the lips which have been separated by a break in continuity are already separated and each part has become sound, then you must scrape away all that part from its visible skin until it bleeds. Then gather the two lips together with a suture and draw them tight, and dust over it dragon's blood powder and ground galbanum; and place above the powder a fragment of powdered emplastrum diaphanicum, or another kind of consolidating plaster; and let him be bound for two days, or three. Then loosen it and change the medicine, and let him go until the strings are cut off by themselves. Then care for him with ointment, until he heals.
But the method of suturing is to gather together the break in continuity with needles, as we have narrated in the suturing of the belly: or gather it together with a thread, just as I have taught you.
Chapter 27.
On the removal of knots of the lips.
Indeed, many men experience hard pustules resembling grains of a herb, and some of them are smaller, and some greater.
Therefore you must turn the lip over and scrape over all the knot on it, and hang him up with a hook, and cut him off from every part.
Then fill the place after cutting with powdered zinc until the blood is congealed.
Then it should be applied with vinegar, and the place where there is a sting should be treated with it until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 28.
On making an incision of flesh born over the gum.
Often flesh grows over the gum which is called by the ancients abuluss.
Therefore it should be suspended with a hook, or held with forceps, and an incision made at its root, so that the pus may flow or the blood.
Then place over the place powdered zygium, or other stinging powders, drying.
But if that flesh returns after the cure, for it often does return, then make an incision in it a second time and cauterize it; for it will not return after the cautery.
Chapter 29.
On filing teeth with iron.
Sometimes they accumulate on the surfaces of teeth from inside and outside, and between the gum and rough, foul cores; sometimes they are denigrated and become yellow, green, until corruption reaches the gum and the teeth are fouled by it.
Therefore you should make the patient sit between your hands, and his head in your bosom, and file the molars and teeth in which the cores appear and are similar to sand: until nothing remains of them, and similarly do this for blackening, and greenishness, and yellowness, and other things until they are cleansed.
If therefore what is inside them from the beginning of filing is removed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the filing over them another day, a second time, and a third, until finally diligence reaches what you desire.
And know that the tooth needs files of diverse forms and many figures: according to what is prepared for your operation; therefore, the file with which the tooth is pared from the lower part is another than the file with which it is pared between the teeth, in other shapes.
And these razor shapes should be prepared for you which you see.
Chapter 30.
On the removal of toothache pain.
It is necessary for you to cure the tooth from its pain with every skill and delay not in extracting it. For it is not the case that its replacement can fill its place when it is extracted: since it is a high substance: until there is no excuse for extracting it, then it is necessary to extract it when the patient is forced, so that it may be firm and certified in you as a hurting tooth.
For often pain deceives the patient and he thinks that there is a sliver in the tooth and extracts it: then the pain does not subside until the patient's tooth is extracted.
For we have now seen this from the procedure of bloodletters.
When therefore it is certified to you that the tooth itself is aching, then it is necessary for you to scarify around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until the gum dissolves from every part: and then move it with your fingers or with fine forceps little by little, until you shake it.
Then place the forceps then in it of good placement, and the head of the infirm person between your knees: which you have already held well so that it does not move: and then pull the tooth according to straightness, so that you do not break it.
If therefore it does not come out, then take some of those instruments and insert it under it from every part with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If however the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary for you to fill that hole with a cloth and tie it with the extremity of a thin splint, so that it does not break at the time of your constriction upon it with forceps.
And you should act carefully with a scarification around the gum from every part very much.
And preserve your strength so that you do not break it, and a part of it remains, and it returns over the sick person from that same malice which was greater in its first pain.
And beware lest you do that which ignorant bleeders do in their haste and boldness, and the removal of it, other than what we have told you to administer.
For many times they make great infirmities occur in men, the breaking of which is more difficult and some or all of their roots remain: or else they extract it with some bones of the jaw: as we have testified has happened many times.
Then it should be closed after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
But if a flow of blood occurs from the place (for it often does so) then apply some alum to it and fill in that place with it: and if not, cauterize it if you do not have alum.
The forms of the pincers should be fine and slender at their extremities, short-handled and thick so that they do not bend when pressed over a tooth: like the handles you see which are thick until you grasp them with them, then they do not bite themselves nor bend. The extremities should be short and made of iron or well-made bronze, straight. And in their extremities there should be teeth, some of which enter into others and grip with decent constriction and strength.
And sometimes the extremities are shaped like the beak of a bird called a stork, and they have strong gripping power.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of broken jaw bones.
When something remains after the removal of a tooth that breaks, then you must put butter on the place for one or two days until the location is softened: then insert into it forceps or pincers, whose extremities resemble the beak of a bird called a stork. The form however of forceps is this.
Let their extremities be made like a file behind, or like scales.
So if he does not obey you to exit with these forceps, then it is necessary that you make an incision above the root, and strip all the flesh, and insert the small instrument called little pincers, whose form is this.
Let it be short of extremity, coarse a little bit, and not be wet, so that it does not break.
So if therefore the root goes out through it, it is good; and if not, it must be helped with these other instruments whose forms are these.
The form of the first triangular extremity, in which there is some coarseness.
The form of the sharp triangular extremity.
And with other instruments and tools which have preceded in the treatment of teeth.
And it is also helped with this instrument which resembles a large claw, of this form, triangular extremity twisted, in which there is some coarseness, so that it does not break; and let it not be wet.
And know that there are many instruments for the teeth; and similarly the other tools do not count, and a skilled craftsman, subtle in his art, finds an instrument by himself according to what each operation and illness signifies.
Because of the illnesses for which the ancients did not say that there was an instrument, on account of their diversity.
But if the bone breaks from the jaw or from other bones of the face, or it rots: then examine above it in its place with that which suits him among instruments and forceps for the extraction of roots, and help with this tool, whose form is this.
While sitting in something of a somewhat rough consistency, so that it may be tightened or filled with the mouth, and not escaping and wandering, until the mouth goes out: and restore the place with medicines fitting to it.
If however there is a small rot in the bone, then scrape it from its own rot, and care for it, until it be healed.
Chapter 32.
On the cutting of teeth that project over others.
When the projecting teeth do not grow according to their natural course, and become foul of form: and especially when it happens in women, and girls, namely the venal.
Therefore you should consider. For if the tooth has grown after another tooth, and does not belong there, or can be cut off, nor polished itself: then remove it: and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose shape is this.
It has the form of a small beak, and is made from hard iron, very sharp at its end.
And let your cut be such that you may cut it on many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to disturb another from the teeth.
If however it is projecting exposed to its polishing, then polish it with a file of iron, whose shape is this.
Let it be all of iron, and its handle have a large number of sharp points, like a file with which needles are made: with which the tooth is polished gradually over many days with ease, lest the tooth should be disturbed and fall: then smooth it out, at last scrape it with certain rasps.
And if it is a tooth from which a part breaks and hurts the tongue: then you must file it also, until the roughness of that break is removed, and it is smoothed out: and flattened, so as not to hurt the tongue, nor corrupt the speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On the treatment of teeth with golden wires.
When the anterior teeth are knocked loose and shaken by a blow or a fall, and an infirm person is unable to hold onto what they eat lest it fall out, and you have treated them with astringent medicines, but the treatment was unsuccessful, then the method for them is to be tied with a gold wire: because silver turns green and rots after days, but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of middle fineness in subtlety and thickness according to the amount that goes between the teeth.
And the form of the retention is this: take a thread and insert twice its length between two sound teeth; then weave it with both ends of the thread into the loose tooth, whether one or more are so, until you reach the other sound tooth. Then repeat the weaving until you reach the part from which you began; and bind your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not moved at all; and let your constriction be such when you bind the thread, at the roots of the teeth, that it does not escape.
Then cut off the superfluous ends of the thread with scissors; and gather both together, and turn them with your fingers; and conceal them between the sound tooth and the loose tooth, so that they do not irritate the tongue; then let them remain thus tightly bound until it remains.
But if it breaks or is cut, bind them again with another thread, and it will stand thus for a whole time.
And this is the form of the teeth, and the figure of the retention of two sound teeth, and two loose teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth, or two, return after a fall on each of their places, and are retained as we have narrated, and they remain; and only an experienced, skilled, and prudent craftsman can do this.
And sometimes a splint is made from bones of a kid: and it is formed like the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the place, from which the tooth is supported and held fast, as we have said: and it remains, and serves with him for a long time.
Chapter 44.
Sometimes this ligament which occurs under the tongue is either natural with which man is born, or accidental from a wound that has already been consolidated.
And the operation on it is, that you open the mouth of the sick person in your arm and elevate his tongue; then cut through the above mentioned nerve-like ligament from side to side, until the tongue is released from its hold.
But if there is something hard and nodular in it, and that is from the consolidation of a wound: then throw into it a hook, and find through its breadth until you cut the ligament, and the knot will be released.
And beware lest there be a fissure in the deep flesh, and you cut an artery there, and bleeding occurs.
Then it should be covered with the track of the incision with rose water, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place a linen poultice under the tongue which the sick person should hold all night, so that it will not become stiffened again.
But if bleeding occurs, then place powdered alum on top of the place. But if the blood overpowers you, then cauterize the place with a lentil-shaped cautery that is suited to it; then cure it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue which resembles a small frog's bladder, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function: and it perhaps becomes so swollen that it fills the mouth.
And the operation for this is, that you open the mouth of the sick person before the sun: and examine the pustule.
If therefore you see it of a dark or black colour, hard, and the sick person does not feel it: then do not touch it, because it is a cancer.
And if it be inclining to whiteness, in which is moisture, then insert a needle into it and cut it with a sharp small spatula, and free it from every part. Which if blood flows over you in the hour of your operation, then place over it crushed alum until the bleeding ceases: then return to your operation, until you extract it with its supplement.
Then bind it with vinegar and salt: and care for it the rest of the cure fitting for it, until it heals.
Of the cure of a pustule on two Pomegranates (amigdalae).
Chapter 36.
And sometimes something occurs between the throat gland, that is, tonsils, which resemble goads, which occur outside: and are called two Pomegranates, which when you cure them with what we said above in a division, and they do not heal, then examine them.
If therefore it is a pustule hard, dark colour, little sensation: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red colour, and its root is thick: then do not touch it with iron, fearing a flow of blood, or even let it alone until it matures. And then either you will pierce it, or it will burst itself.
And if it is of white colour, round, and its root is thin: then you must cut it.
And the operation for this is, that you examine before your operation, if the pustule on it has cooled down quietly and completely, or diminished in some degree: then therefore make the sick person sit before the sun, and his head be in your bosom: and open his mouth, and let a servant take hold of it between his hands, and press his tongue downwards with an instrument, whose form is this.
Let it be made from silver, or bronze, which is as fine as a knife.
Since therefore you press with it your tongue, and a boil shows itself to you, and falls on it the view of yours: then take the hook, and thrust it into the kernel, and draw out from it as far as you can to the exterior, except that you pull with it something from the tunics.
Then cut it open with a tool, of whose form this follows. It is similar to forceps: however its extremities are curved, so that the opening of each one is directly opposite the other's point: whence be careful that it be made of tempered iron, or of bronze imbued.
But if this tool is not present, then cut it open with a pair of scissors, whose form follows here. Let it be sharp at one part, not sharp at the other.
And after you have cut one kernel, then cut another similarly in this same form of incision.
Then after the cutting, let the patient gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
But if there occurs to him a flow of blood, let him gargle with water in which pomegranate rinds have been boiled: or leaves of myrtle and such things as are similar to them from styptics, until the bleeding ceases: then care for him until he heals.
And sometimes other boils appear in the throat, apart from the two tonsils. Cut them therefore according to what I said about cutting the two tonsils equally.
And I myself have already cured a woman from an abscess which had formed between her throat, that was drawing to blackness, and she had few senses, because it had almost closed the throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and she had already forbidden her eating and drinking water: and she had already come to death if it had remained one day, or two days.
And the boil had risen so much that it had emitted two branches, until they came out over two nostrils.
I therefore bound them hastily, and tied one of their hooks together. Then I pulled it, and a large portion came out from it.
Then I cut it off where it could be grasped through the nostril.
Then I did to him what had protruded from his other nostril.
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue: and afterwards tied the hook into the boil: then I cut off from it a part of it, and there ran out from it only little blood: so therefore was the woman's throat cured, and she began to drink water immediately, and then took food.
So I did not cease to cut off from that boil many times for a long time: and the boil succeeded in its place which I was cutting, until it was prolonged too much and with it.
I therefore contrived, and cauterized the boil between the throat.
It therefore stood still from further increase: then I walked away from her part, and did not know what God had done with her afterwards.
¶ On making an incision in a boil of the uvula.
Chapter XXXVII.
When the catarrh has descended to the uvula and it boils and is long: then itself is called perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part thick, rounded, then itself is called uvva.
When it is cured with the thing which we said in the division, and the treatment does not help: and you see that the boil has cooled down from it, and is fine: then it is necessary to cut it.
And what is attached to it rounded and not in length, and is bloody, or of a fluid colour, or black, and there is no sense in it: then it is necessary to make a cut into it. In this case indeed there is fear over the ailing person.
It is necessary therefore when you see her according to the method I said of light and length, that you make the ailing person sit before the sun: and press her tongue with the tool about which I previously spoke: then insert the hook into one side and pull it down: and cut her with one of the two instruments which I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
And you must not cut into it except that which is added over the natural term without addition.
For if you cut into it more than that, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the incision use on it what we narrated in the incision of the two almonds, and care for her until she heals.
But if the ailing person is frightened by the incision, then it is necessary that you use your ingenuity in cauterizing him without fear and terror.
And the method of cauterizing her is not except with sharp water: and it is to place the head of the ailing person on your shoulder. Then press her tongue with the tool which we mentioned. Then take from the water which I told you to in the chapter of cauterizing and mix with it a coal not extinguished, and place it not dense, nor subtle, and fill the concavity of this tool, whose form is this.
Let the extremity of it to which the medicine is placed be hollowed out, like the concavity of a snail shell.
And place the instrument with the medicine on her own uvula: and let the ailing person lie on their side so that saliva may flow from his mouth from within the medicine itself, lest anything fall from it into his throat and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from the first place it on the uvula a quantity of the time of half an hour, until you see that it is already darkened and the pain of the medicine has been assuaged.
And if you wish to take a splint, and wrap it over the end of the radius, and pour medicine into the splint, and insert the radius with the splint into the canal from above, until the splint adheres to the bone.
Do that many times, until you achieve what you desire by cauterizing the vein. Then release it: for indeed it dries out and falls after three days, or four.
Which if you need to renew the medicine, renew it: and after cauterizing wipe around the vein with a stick soaked in butter, and cleanse with that which is in its surroundings from the medicine: and bind it with cold water.
And it should be treated externally with ointments, and then internally with cataplasms, until it heals.
Therefore this method of treatment is more wholesome than an incision and farther away from fear.
And sometimes the vein is healed even with what is finer than a cauterizing iron and an incision: for it is healed by fumigating, in this manner. Take alum, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and saffron, and chamomile, and abrotanum, and similar things to them from herbs: and gather all these together, or some of them in a pot, and they are drowned with vinegar, and they boil: and the pot is plastered with clay decently: and there is a hole in the middle of the pot, over which an instrument with a concave shape will be composed according to this manner.
It should be made of silver, or bronze: and the extremity, in which is the powder, will be inserted into the mouth of the sick person, until the vapor ascends to the vein above the tube, until the vein is very obscured.
Then repeat over it many times, until it dries up.
And beware, lest you do this treatment at the beginning of an ulcer's arrival. For many wounds it adds a poultice in suppurating abscesses: and thou oughtest not to do that except at the decline of the fever of the abscess.
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a stick of wood and compose it at the end with the rind of an egg, so that the tooth of the infirm one does not burn: for the rind of an egg prevents the vapor from burning the tooth: and this is from good healing with health.
Concerning the removal of splinters, and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Often something adheres to the throat, a bone or a fishbone, or some other thing.
Therefore you should remove that which is appearing on what falls under sight, after you have pressed the tongue with an instrument in the sun, and it has been declared to you that it is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it behoves that you should make the patient vomit before food has been digested in the stomach. For perhaps indeed something attached will come out through vomiting.
Or the infirm one swallows a piece of dried turnip, or the root of lettuce, or swallows a dry crumb of bread; or takes a piece of dry sea sponge and binds it up with a thread, then swallows it. When therefore it reaches the place where are the splinters or bone, and is drawn out, then it comes out.
If therefore it does not come out with what we said, then use an instrument of lead according to this shape.
Let it be thicker than a radius a little, and at the end of it let there be a curvature, that you may insert it into his throat with ease; and let itself have its head elevated upwards.
And beware of touching his epiglottis, lest coughing happen to him; and push with it the bone or splinter, or insert it himself with his hand.
It is true that an infirm person should intervene, that is to say, it is better: because of their knowledge about the place of the thing attached; and they push downward or draw their hand upward with a tool, all of this according to the quantity which has been prepared for them, until it emerges.
On the removal of the leech.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
When the leech is being treated with what I said in the section on treatment with medications, and it does not adhere, then consider in the throat of the infirm person before the sun, or after the sun when you have pressed his tongue with the instrument which I told you about.
If therefore your gaze falls upon the leech, take it out with a small hook or with delicate fingers.
And if it is not possible with them [delicate fingers or hook], then take a concave tube and insert it into the throat of the infirm person until near the throat; then insert a glowing iron rod into the concavity of the tube. Do that many times, and let the infirm person abstain from water all day.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, and open his mouth in it; and let him wash his mouth with it, and not swallow anything from it; and let him move the water one hour after another with his own hand. For the leech immediately falls when it feels the water.
But if it does not come out with what we said, then fumigate the infirm person with cumin or with asafoetida with the instrument which I told you about for the fumigation of a uvula.
Do that many times, because it itself will fall.
And the mode of operation in fumigation is, that you take a pot in which are fresh prunes with fire; and the pot shall be covered with a cover, in whose middle there is an opening; and arrange the end of the instrument in that opening.
Then let him place a smoke there, and the patient put his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, until you know that the smoke has reached the bloodsucker. For the leech will immediately fall.
And if it does not fall, then repeat the smoke many times.
And let the patient be thirsty, and eat salt, and onions, and not drink water.
It is therefore necessary that he come out with this regimen.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which the leech is drawn from the throat when it falls on it in sight.
It resembles forceps, as you see: except that it has this curvature which is introduced into the throat. And its extremity resembles the beak of a bird which is called a stork, in which there is the roughness of a nail: when it has grasped something, it does not let it go altogether.
Of the opening of apostumes, and their cutting, and care for them generally.
Chapter 40.
The species of apostumes are many, of various kinds, according to the memory of them, that is, one and one which is mentioned in this book: and they differ in their perforation and cutting in two ways.
One of them is a type of aposteme that forms within itself, and because it gathers from moistures.
And the second way is because of the places in which it occurs on the body.
For an aposteme that occurs on the head is one thing from an aposteme that occurs in the anus: and an aposteme that occurs in a fleshy place is another from an aposteme that occurs at a joint: and each of them has its own judgment from experience.
And from apostemes are those which should not be perforated unless after the maturation of health in them and its completion: and from these are those which should be perforated while they are raw, and do not mature according to their completion.
As for boils which are situated near joints.
For since a boil which occurs near a joint and prolongs itself until what is surrounding it putrefies may possibly corrupt the tendons or nerves of that joint; wherefore there is a more probable cause of its adjacent member's contraction.
Or it is a boil on the main member itself; for if you delay making an incision until it matures, it will harm either that one or the adjacent main member.
Or it is near the anus, therefore make an incision on it unripe: and you should not cut into a fresh boil, not yet completed in digestion, except that which is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply and extend to the inner parts of the anus, and form a fistula, or remain at its end and not heal.
You should know the hour of making an incision on a boil that has matured according to its completion; and it is at the station of relief from pain, abatement of fever, diminution of redness and pulsation, and sharpness of the head of the boil: and the other signs.
And you should make the same incision in the lower part of the boil and more prominent elevation; and let the incision be going along in length through the body, if the boils are on parts of the hands and feet, and places of arms, tendons, nerves, arteries, and at last in all equal locations where there is no reflection.
But in those which are reflected, make the incision along with it according to that member.
And when the boil is on fleshy places; then it is better to leave its incision until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to completion.
For if you make an incision on it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there are many filth and foulness, and perhaps its lips become hardened and its depth becomes greater.
And certain boils are pierced according to the breadth of the body in necessity; or according to what a limb needs.
And it is necessary to administer a small piercing in small boils and a wide piercing in large boils; or many cuttings according to the likeness of the size of the boil.
And there are boils from which it is necessary to cauterize the skin and cut when already it has become like a cloth and has turned at the end that is already dead such as those that occur in many cases, as an ulcus or a bubo.
And from them are those which are cut with a cutting having three angles. And from them is that from which it is cut like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Like an inguinal boil.
And from them are those in which a round cut and a crescent cut are administered: and similar to these from cuts.
Indeed that which does not have a head, such as soft and superficial boils, it is necessary to pierce it with a shallow piercing, or only a flat one.
And it is necessary when the boil is large and has already gathered much matter to pierce it so that the pus does not form and you extract the whole pus at once; or take a part of it from it. Then cover the boil with an ointment until another day. Then extract something again from the pus again.
Do this many times according to the order, until it comes out: especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an elderly decrepit person: for the spirit of life often dissolves from one animal with the egress of pus, and perhaps the sick person will die, and you won't notice.
Therefore beware this chapter with great caution.
And after your piercing, by which you pierce boils, it is necessary to clean the wound and observe. If therefore there is a wound of a small boil, or it is a flat cut, then administer linseed from flax, or old wine. And if it is a large boil, and there are many perforations of the fissure, then you must introduce linseed into all the fissures, until they come together.
And if in the boil you have cut off a part of the skin, or hollowed it out around it: then you must fill it with old wine, or as when cloth is sewn, or wool is shorn from flax without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then throw it out, and take care of it with that which is necessary from an ointment, until it heals.
But if there occurs a flowing of blood at the time of your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after a cloth has been soaked in them: and place it repeatedly over the place of the flowing of blood.
But if the flowing of blood persists, then you must administer a dressing, and care, and powders, which I have narrated in many places of this our book, and from division.
But if it is at the time of winter, and the place of the boil is of many nerves: then you must pour in powders with wine and hot oil: and place them over the places.
And if it is in summer, and the places are fleshy: then you must place powders soaked in water and oil, or them in wine and oil, and all that is cold. Until when the third day comes, as we said, then it is necessary that you dissolve the boil, and wash it away, and administer to its cure what is fitting for it, until it heals.
This then is what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure of boils universally.
According to the method of distinction, I have already spoken about every abscess, how there is a way to its cure chapter by chapter individually.
Chapter 41.
On the cutting of abscesses which occur on the skin of the head.
Small abscesses occur on the skin of the head, and they are similar in appearance to boils, which are enclosed by pouches, that is, the skins, which contain them, like eggs hatched by a hen.
And their kinds are many.
Among them are those that are fatty; and among them are those which contain moisture similar to mud: and among them are those which contain moisture similar to porridge and puddings: and similar to them, and among them are those which are hard and stony.
And in the cutting of all of them, and their extraction there is no fear, as long as at their cutting does not conflict with an artery.
And the operation on cutting them is, that you experiment with them by means of an instrument, whose shape will be described afterwards, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then cut it out with a superficial incision following its length, in this shape.
And begin with an incision from the line b to the line g. And when the moisture has been evacuated, then scrape out the cyst which contains that moisture, and let nothing be left in it.
For indeed many times it returns if anything remains in it.
Then immerse the poultice in Egyptian ointment, if it is available: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the wound with it, and leave it until another day. For indeed it will rot what remained from the cyst.
Then repeat the poultice on top of it with Egyptian ointment a second time, and a third time, and if you need to use more, do so until you are confident that nothing remains from the cyst. For then indeed you can cure the wound with ointment, until it is healed.
If the apostema contains a thick knot: then cut it according to this form, with an incision in the shape of a cross: and throw into the incision some salt between the two blades of the incision, and scrape off from all parts: and try your power in extracting the skin that contains it.
But if a vein makes difficulty for you, then do what I shall tell you afterwards.
And similarly act in an apostema, if it is stony, from the incision and its cure is the same, according to what we said.
And the cut over a stony apostema is easier: because there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes among these apostemata are some found on the head of certain people, in which there is no moisture at all.
For I cut over an apostema on the head of an old woman and found the apostema to be like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if anyone struck it with something throwing, he would hurt himself.
But on other accidental apostemata occurring on the head, apart from these indeed which occur on the heads of children and near the roots of the ears, their cutting is a superficial cut.
Or make a perforation in them always from the lower part of them, so that the flow of pus may be eased to the lower parts.
Then cure those with what is suitable for them among the cures.
About cutting Officiale sores on the neck.
Chapter 42.
These apostemata often occur on the neck and under the armpits and thighs: and sometimes they occur in the rest of the body.
And on those that occur on the neck, there is one and many of them, and they are generated from one another: and every Officiale sore out of them is within its own skin, just as it is in knots and head apostemata, as we have described.
And the shapes of these strophulae are many. And from them there are lithic, and from them those which contain humidity, and from them the malignant ones, which do not obey cure.
Therefore, that one which you see of good disposition by touch, whose manifest color is like the skin's, and it moves to every part, and is not joined with the nerves of the neck, nor with the jugular vein, nor with the artery, nor is it deep: it must be cut off from the upper to the lower part of the body along line b. to line g., and scrape it completely: and extend two folds of skin with a hook or with many hooks if you need it, just as we said in head apostemats, and pull it out gradually.
And beware lest you cut the vein, or the nerve.
And let the spatula be not sharp at all: lest you cause yourself with the cut, or trouble the patient, and cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut the vein, or artery, and it prevents you from operating, then put some ground zegi, or certain powders that stop blood, into the wound, and bind the wound, and leave it until the sharpness of the apostemat ceases, and the wound softens: or rather let it begin to putrefy.
For blood is stopped by a cloth Therefore return to your operation until you complete it.
Then inquire with your index finger if anything remains of the other small strophulae: therefore cut them and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the strophulae: then it must be that you do not cut that strophula from its root: nay, but rather tie it with a doubled strong thread, and leave it until it falls on its own without harm.
Then fill the wound with a piece of old cord, which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it.
If a swelling develops around the wound, then it is necessary to close together the two lips of the wound; and sew it up immediately, as soon as you see that there is no excess remaining.
But if you see that there is excess remaining because of the size of the swelling, then it is necessary to apply yourself to cutting out the root of it, and pulling it out; and to administer a suture such as we said.
And what contains humidity among the swellings, pierce it with a superficial puncture; so that you may see the place of its maturity; and place the puncture below from what follows in the lower part of the body, as we said.
Then apply linseed with ointment to it after the puncture, and similar things to them, so that what remains from corruption may rot away; until when you see that the wound is now clean; then take care of it with a unguent born of flesh generation, until it heals.
Chapter 43.
About the cutting off of the epiglottis from an abscess occurring inside the throat.
The ancients said this cutting into the epiglottis and I have not seen anyone on our earth who has done it; and this is the writing of their speech.
But in those having dyspnea, it is necessary to avoid cutting into the epiglottis: because there will be no benefit through it; on account of which all the veins and lung are weak.
But in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no suffering in the canal, it is necessary to make an incision into the epiglottis, in order to flee from the destruction that comes from suffocation.
It is necessary therefore when we wish to do it, that we cut into the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small incision through breadth, in what is between two circles by quantity, so that the incision may be in the mucous membrane, not in the cartilage: and this indeed place is fitting for an incision, because it is private from flesh, and the vessels of blood are far from it.
If the surgeon is timid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he cuts the skin, until it reaches the canal; pus or blood flows out, if he sees anything from them.
Then he sutures the incision that we have described; and it is indicated over the cut of the canal because of the pus that comes out from it, with it being torn and the cutting of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
So when however the hour is reached in which a closure is feared, gather together the two lips of the wound of the skin, and sew them up by themselves alone without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it heals.
It is said by Albucasis. The sum of what we have narrated in this speech is that the explanation is not given unless it is seen that one of these abscesses has already obstructed the throat of the infirm person: and the infirm person is raised up to the point of death, and wants his breathing cut off: they go to cutting the Epiglottis so that the infirm person breathes over the place of the wound with some respiration and is saved from death: and for this reason they have commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness is consumed, and it is an evil of three days, and as if itself: then therefore they have commanded to sew up the wound and cure it until it heals.
And that which I saw by myself is that one slave girl took a knife and sent it into her throat and cut with it the part of the lung's canal.
And I was called to heal her, and I found her bellowing like a mooing of the dead.
I therefore drew out from the wound and found the blood that had flowed out from the wound to be small. So I was assured that the very thing had not been cut off nor cauterized; and air was escaping from the wound.
I immediately sewed up and cared for the wound itself until it was healed; and nothing happened to the maid servant except that her voice became hoarse, and she returned after a few days to better condition.
Therefore I say, there is no fear in cutting into the epiglottis.
On the cutting of a hernia of the throat.
Chapter 44.
This hernia called apostema of the throat is a great swelling, according to the color of the body, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it is in two modes: either it is natural, or it is accidental.
Certainly there is no art in the natural kind.
The accidental kind, however, is in two modes: one of which is similar to a swelling with pustules. And the other mode is similar to an apostema that forms from the blockage of an artery. And in it there is fear, and one should not make a presumption with iron on it unless it is small; and you will test it, and investigate it with an instrument. If therefore you find it similar to a swelling with pustules, and it is not hanging from any veins; then cut it out, just as you would cut out a nodule; and extract it along with that which contains it in the sac, if it is in a sac: and if not, then thoroughly investigate all of it. Then care for the place with what is necessary from treatment, until it heals.
Chapter 45.
On the cutting of above the type of Nodules.
There are many types of nodules, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division; and it is necessary that I narrate here the difference between a nodule and an abscess, since it causes doubt.
I therefore say, that when the operation is warm, and fever, and great pains exist until the inflammation of excessiveness is stilled, and putrefaction is completed; then indeed fever and heat cease.
Since however there is no warmth, nor fever, nor pains, and they are contained by a sac of siplachin, which is their proper sack, and it agrees with the color of the body: and it begins like chickpeas, and becomes like blisters, greater and lesser.
And they are according to two kinds: either fatty: or containing moisture. And the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
It is therefore necessary, when arriving at the cure of a Nod, that you test him, and inquire into it first with an instrument which is called an Intromissum, according to what its form will be in the chapter that follows this.
And the method of inquiry for all pustules and Nods is, that you take this instrument, and insert it into a more moist place which you find in the pustule: and you turn your fingers with it slowly, until you know that the instrument has already pierced the skin. Then with your last hand according to the measurement of the size of the pustule.
Then withdraw the Intromissum, and examine that which comes out in its track.
If therefore moisture running out comes out, whatever the color is: then cut it off with a superficial incision, according to what I said in the other pustules.
And if no moisture comes out in the track of the Intromissum, then you will know that it is fatty: therefore cut above it with an incision having the form of a cross, according to this form, as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and strip away the skin from all parts with ease: and protect the sac if you can over it, so that you may draw out the healthy sac along with the Nod.
If however the cyst bursts during the operation, and it is not possible to remove the healthy part of it, this happens often enough, then remove it piece by piece until nothing remains.
For if anything remains from it little or much, the Nodus most often returns.
But if it overpowers you and something remains from it little: then fill the wound with your completion, with certain sharp corrosive powders, and bind the wound, and place above it what sits a warm poultice, and cure it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
Therefore if the Nodus is great, then close its two lips over it, and cure it with that which becomes fleshed.
But if there is contrary pulsating or non-pulsating vein: then hasten and fill the place with crushed zegi, and leave it tightened for two days, or three, until the wound puttrefies and the boiling of blood subsides: then return to cutting what remains from the Nodus.
Chapter 46.
About the outer instruments for cutting and perforating.
These are the forms of Intromissories, and they are of three kinds.
From them there is a great one, and from them there is a middle one, and from them there is a small one.
They are made of iron with the four-angled ends smoothed out, so that they may hurry into the inflamed part.
And these are the forms of Perforators, and indeed they are, that is, piercing ones, and one of them is called Beris, that is, piercer, and they are of three kinds.
From them there is a great one, and a middle one, and a small one.
They are suitable for investigating through them abscesses, and ulcers, and fistulas, and boils from the bone that is between them.
And others are made round, smooth, soft, like large needles with which they upholster seats, namely from citron wood, or iron, or steel, or silver.
And those that are made of citron are the better ones.
And they are also made by experience from black lead, which is suitable for testing fistulas, the concavity of whose reflections cause them to be reflected with their own softness when reflected against these reflections.
And again there are three kinds. Because they are of a length, of an intermediate length, and of a short length, according to the magnitude of the fistula and its constriction.
The form of ligatures, and there are many kinds.
Because they are simple, that is to say those with one curvature; and there are three kinds as you see, Great, Middle, and Small.
And from them are blind ligatures: and there are three kinds.
And from them are ligatures having two curvatures, and there are three kinds: and from them are ligatures having three curvatures, and there are three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels with which knots and apostemes are cut out and scraped away: and there are three kinds: because from them is great, middle, and small.
Their extremities with which a section is made are sharp, the other extremities are not sharp; and they should not be placed thus, unless it happens that with them relief is made in the scraping away of knots near fear of incision of a vein or nerve: and so an infirm person may be healed through them, and find tranquility for a little while from burning which he finds at the scraping away of an aposteme.
They are made of iron, and are similar to a Radium with which an injection is made: and at their broad extremity there are hidden points of spatula: and within them it flows inward and outward when you wish, as you see.
The form of bandages which are hidden among the fingers for piercing abscesses: and the sick do not perceive them; and there are three kinds, great, medium, and small.
The forms of astringent plasters with which bleeding is stopped: and there are three kinds, great, medium, and small.
They should be made from air or saffron, round, to a length somewhat, as you see them: and they should be thin.
And it is necessary that these kinds of astringent plasters be present to you, great and small: so that with them you can stop blood flow quickly in necessity, and then when medicine is not available.
However you should not use them in the stopping of blood everywhere in the body, and you should not use them except in fleshy places: such as the calves, thighs, arms, nipples, belly, groin, and similar ones, from fleshy moist limbs.
And sometimes they make from them small instruments similar to the rinds of figs, according to their shape: with which blood is stopped when it flows from a place of phlebotomy, or at an incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made round in this form.
Chapter 47.
About the care of the nipples of men which resemble those of women.
Sometimes the nipples of some men become inflamed at the completion of sleep (that is, when they start to urinate while sleeping) until they resemble those of women: and remain inflamed with bad swelling.
Therefore he who is afraid of that, should shave over the nipples with a lunar incision, according to this shape from the line, b, to the line, g. Then scrape away all the fatness. Then fill the wound with flesh medicine. Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and care for it, until it heals.
But if the nipple inclines towards the lower parts and becomes softened because of its size, as happens to women: then it must be cut into two upper sides with two cuts similar in shape to a crescent moon, each one being contained with the other at their ends until there is a longer line containing a shorter one, according to this form from line b. to line g. Then remove the skin that is between the two lips and take away the fat, and administer what we said about suturing and powders, which are necessary for healing, until it heals.
But if you do not complete the incision that is necessary for you to make, because of the disturbance of the patient or because of a flow of blood: then it must be filled with ointment immersed in a caustic, and leave it alone until it corrodes what remains of fat. Then care for it, until it heals.
About the piercing of an abscess, which occurs under the titillate (tittillus).
Chapter 48.
These abscesses which occur under the titillate are of a hard type like sponges that contain pus, and also those that contain moisture.
Therefore those that are of the type which contain moisture must be incised with a crescent-shaped cut, according to this form, from line b. to line g. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated by means of pus, then fill it with old dressing and leave it until another day.
Then the dressing is to be removed, and it is to be cared for with a suitable ointment, until it heals.
And if the abscess is of the type of solid nodules like sponges, then cut over it, as we said in cutting over equal sponges.
If however the wound extends so that it emits pus, then apply a caustic to it, as we said in what was said before.
Chapter Forty-nine.
On the cutting of an abscess which occurs on account of an artery and a vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin which is above it becomes hardened, then many times an abscess occurs therefrom; and similarly with veins, that an abscess and swelling occur in them.
And the signs by which it is known that an abscess and swelling are on account of an artery and a vein, are: because when an abscess is from an artery, it is long, accumulated in deep within the body; and when you press upon the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there were a hissing sound.
And that which is from a vein is rounded in the body's surface.
And cutting into this abscess is a mistake, and especially when it is under the armpits, and groins, and neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great. Therefore care must be taken to avoid cutting into it with iron, and what is from them even in the extremities, or on the head, must also be avoided.
Therefore into that which comes from it by reason of the expansion of the artery's opening, cut into the skin in length. Then open up the incision with a hook, afterwards the artery; and free it from its sheaths until it is revealed.
Then insert an awl under it and make it penetrate as far as the other side; and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, just as I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temporal regions.
Then prick the place between the two ligatures with a small spatula, until the blood that is in it all comes out and the abscess is resolved.
Then administer a treatment that produces pus until the bonds fall apart. Afterwards treat it with ointments suitable for that until it heals.
If there is an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you must take from the abscess with your hand as much as possible along with the skin. Then insert a needle into the place which you took with your hand and make it penetrate, and let there be in it a thread twice its length, until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie it with the same abscess with a good bandage: as I told you to do with the grape, from two parts with two ends of thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another needle with another thread under the entire abscess near the incision of the needle; press and draw your threads together in four places.
Then cut the abscess in its middle until what is inside it comes out; then cut away the superfluity of skin and let go that which was tied to it.
Then place over it a poultice which you immersed in wine and oil. Then administer the treatment that is made with liniments and ointments until it heals.
Chapter L.
Regarding an abscess that occurs from twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, similarly an abscess occurs in nerves: which comes from a blow or excessive labor and similar things: and it occurs very much in places of joints, or heel, and in every place where joints are moved: and it is a grave abscess.
It resembles the color of its surrounding body, and it is found in many dispositions without pain: and when it becomes inflamed with fever, one feels a weakness similar to lethargy in it.
And it is not a deep abscess, but rather under the skin, and itself moves to every part, and does not extend forward or in front, nor backward to the back.
Therefore what is connected in them should not be invaded with iron. Perhaps indeed a contraction will occur.
But in that which is connected to the head or forehead, find the skin with a spatula. Therefore if it is a small abscess, then hold it fast with forceps and cut it off from its root.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook and lance it; then remove it, and sew up the wound with a suture; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On the cutting of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
There occur in some people, many times in their intestines and in other parts of their bodies, swellings which are called "Fungalia", by resemblance to mushrooms.
Whose root is slender, and the head is large, and the lips of them are turned back. And there is a small one among them, and there is also one that greatly grows.
And I myself have already seen a man, and in his abdomen were two thelils which were more like mushrooms than other things: there was no difference between them, white, with slender roots, and their lips were turned inward, and they were found, and moisture flowed from them always.
I therefore cut them and found that one weighed as much as nine ounces and eight, and the other as much as six; and the operation of cutting them is, that you consider then if the sick person is moist, and the color of the thelil is white, moist, slender root: then cut it with a wide spatula, and be present yourself, with cauterizing instruments in fire.
For often indeed much blood is expelled during the cutting of it; therefore hurry if blood overpowers you, then cauterize it.
If you see a fearful and timid patient afraid of cutting with iron, then take a thread made from decently formed lead, and bind it with him to the atthel which we mentioned earlier, and leave it for two days.
Then add some lead to the stricture. Therefore do not cease from binding the lead as often as it becomes loose, until it is cut off and falls away without effort.
But if the atthel is of thick root, then there is something to fear and dread in its cutting, especially within the belly.
However it is possible for you to cut half of it. Then cauterize it so that it does not recur.
Then care for him until the wound is healed.
And beware lest you presume to cut the atthel that is of foul colour, little sensation, and bad appearance: for it is a cancerous ulcer: and I come with reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
¶ On the care for protrusion of the Navel.
There is a protrusion of the navel from many causes. Or from fissures of the sphincter which is over the belly: and an intestine comes out through it, or a part of the intestines, according to what happens in other ruptures. Or from blood that flows from the Vein, or from the Artery, as was previously mentioned. Or from a constricted and swollen vein in it.
If however it is because of a fissure of the sphincter and a protrusion of the intestines, then its colour is similar to the colour of the body: and it is smooth, without pain: and it has a different appearance. And if it is because of the protrusion of an intestine, then its condition with it is of a more vehement and greater difference. When therefore you press it with your fingers, it conceals itself; then it returns and perhaps a sound comes with it: and much glory is made about the entrance of the bath, and great effort.
If it is however because of humidity, it is soft: then it does not conceal itself when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict or swell.
Which if it is because of blood, then with these signs an abscess appears to blackness from the swelling.
If however it is because of born flesh: then it is a severe abscess, large, hard, and remains according to its size.
If it is however because of inflammation, then the touch of it is soft.
And the operation on it is, that you will then consider, if the swelling of the navel is because of blood from an artery or vein, or inflammation: then it should be forbidden to cure it. For on that there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I said abscesses because of an artery and vein.
Which if the swelling of the navel is because of the intestine or bladder: then it should be ordered to the patient, as much as possible, to hold his breath and stand standing upright. Then make signs with encaustum around the entire navel. Afterwards order him to be placed on his back between your hands. Then encircle with a spatula, wide and flat, around the navel area over the place you marked with encaustum. Afterwards stretch out the middle of the abscess upwards, with a large needle. Then bind it tightly around with strong thread, or with a cord of silk and firm sinew: and let the knot of the ligature be loose.
Then open the middle part of the abscess stretched out above the ligature. If therefore you have found it already captured by the ligament: then pull out the instrument and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine to the inside of the abdomen. And if you find a tumour, then take it with a forceps and cut off its superfluity.
But if the artery or vein is against you: then encircle it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads; and insert the two needles into the ligature which you made around the tumour in the form of a cross, so that they penetrate.
Then bind the tumour in four places over the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place, until the stretched flesh rots and falls by itself; or cut it when it becomes thin and rotten.
Then take care of it with what is necessary from ointments, until it heals.
But if the prominence of the navel is from raw flesh within it, or from moisture: then it should be concaved, as we said. And draw out the blood, or moisture, which you find in it.
Then take care of it with what consolidates the place.
Chapter 53.
Note on the treatment of a cancer.
We have already spoken in the division of the kinds of cancer, and how it is the way to its cure with medicines; and beware of it with its cure with iron, lest it ulcerate; and we said that the cancer generated in the womb, and the caution against its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible; such as cancer which is in the breasts, or in the hip, and those similar to them, located in parts from which it can be wholly extracted: especially when it is beginning and small.
When it is old and large, you must not approach it.
For I was unable to cure anyone from it, nor did I see another before me who had reached out to it.
And the operation for it, when it is located as we said, is, as mentioned before, to precede and dissolve the sickness from black bile sometimes. Then if you find it with a clear filling, bleed it.
Then prepare the sick person for preparation, in which it will be located during the operation.
Then place on it the thorns that fit it. Then hollow it out from every part with the skin, according to examination, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it quickly, but rather press on the places and wipe away all the thick blood with your hand, or as best you can there with instruments.
But if a counterflow of thick blood from the artery or vein causes you trouble at the incision: then cauterize the vein until the bleeding stops. Then treat it with the remaining treatment, until it heals.
¶ On the cure of Hydropepsis.
Chapter LIII. Now we have discussed in the division the kinds of Hydropepsis, and how water gathers together, and the signs of every kind, and its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not but one kind of ascites alone, and does not approach cure with iron the kinds of tympanitis nor of hypochondriac disease, for it is mortal.
When you are already cured of this kind of Hydropepsis which causes tympanitis with medicines, and your treatment has not helped: then consider. For if the sick person has already been weakened by a weakness, or is suffering from another illness besides Hydropepsis, such as coughing, or the dissolution of the intestines, and similar things to those, then beware of treating him with iron, for it is feared.
If however you see a sick person of robust virtue, and he is not suffering from any disease other than simple dropsy: and he is neither a boy nor an old man: then the manner of operating on him is, that you lift up the sick person standing between your hands, and have another attend after him express his belly with his hand forcing water down to the lower part of his navel.
Then take a thorned spatula, in this shape. There should be two sharp parts, long, with a sharp point like the spatula. However in it should be something of shortness gradually, so that you do not pass through with it up to the intestine during the operation and harm it.
Then examine. For if there is a generation of dropsy from the part of the intestines, then you must extend with a cut from the navel three finger lengths downwards straight over his navel.
If however the generation of dropsy is on account of liver disease, then let your cut be on the left from the navel three fingers.
And if his generation is on account of the spleen, then let the cut be on the right side: and it should not also be that the cut is on the side over which the sick person wants to lie, lest there flow to that weak place.
Then pierce through with an instrument the whole cut. Then insert into that cut and lift up your hand with the spatula between the cuts, and scrape, as if you were removing it: and let be the quantity that is scraped off the quantity of a nail, or nearly so.
Then pierce through with the spatula until it reaches the empty space, and that is the place of water. Then extract it and insert into the opening the instrument which has this shape. And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or bronze, or tin, smooth and polished: with a small hole at the lower part of itself, and on its sides are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other: and the tip of it is cut off, according to the shape of a reed pen, as you see: and there is an armlet at the upper end of it.
For when the instrument reaches water, then it itself sinks at once upon the instrument, therefore it drains out of the water by a quantity middle.
Because if you drain out from it more than is necessary, perhaps the patient will die in an hour by the resolution of his vital spirits: or a suffocation will come upon him that approaches death.
But drain out from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the patient's arrangements signify to you through his pulse, and through his condition.
Then draw out the instrument, and retain the water.
Which is because it is retained at once on account of the skin which retains the hole that is over the abscess: of which I spoke, as to perforate it in this manner.
Then introduce the instrument on another day, if you see that the patient is able to tolerate it; and also draw out a small quantity from the water.
Do this for several days without fear, and guard yourself against error, until only a little remains in the water.
But if you fear for the patient, and leave much out of the water: then treat him with burial in warm sand, and great sweat in a bath and sun, and let him wait for thirst: and treat him with dried medicines, until he is healed; and cauterize over his stomach, liver, and spleen, after the extraction of the water: according to what I said previously.
Concerning the care of infants born with unperforated places in their urinary organs.
Chapter 55.
When someone is brought out of the womb of his mother and the infant's head has not perforated, or it has a narrow opening, or in an unnatural place.
Therefore assistance must be provided with the perforation of it at once with a very fine spatula as it is born.
Then place a thin metal splinter into the hole, and tie it fast; and keep it thus for three or four days.
When, however, he wishes to urinate, let it be removed, and let him urinate. Then put it back in.
And if you do not place the metal, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will prevent it from closing.
But he whose hole is tight is cured with metal, as we said, over many days, until it becomes enlarged.
But those in whom the hole is in a different place are hurt. Which is because the hole is at the end of the head of the penis; so he cannot urinate towards the front until he raises his penis with his hand to the top. Nor is he able to generate because the semen cannot reach the matrix according to its straightness; and it is very great suffering.
And the manner of operating on him is, that he be placed supine over his back. Then extend the head of his penis with your left hand in a strong extension, and cut off the head of the penis from the place of the priapus, with a sharp point or spatula tip; just as is the cutting of a reed, or as you sharpen something, so that its middle comes out like the head of the penis: and so that the hole falls in the middle as it should.
And beware for yourself at your operation lest there be bleeding. For indeed that often happens. Therefore apply to him the thing with which you staunch blood, and cure the wound until it heals.
Concerning Albuter (possibly a reference to a medical condition or instrument) which happens in the foreskin and head of the penis, and corruption, blackening, and sticking.
Chapter 56.
These kinds of boils often occur on the leg, and there is a foul swelling of the flesh.
And from it another is malignant, and another is not malignant.
Therefore a non-malignant one ought to be suspended with a thin needle, and cut out from it until it is clean throughout. Then place over it a compress immersed in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of the other one afterwards with Diaphanicon ointment until it heals.
Which if the boil is malignant and of foul colour, then one must apply a caustic after cutting it open and removing its reason.
But if the boil is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised captive and is a part within, and another part outside, then one must remove the boil that is inside first until it consolidates, then take care of the other one outside: for when you treat them at the same time, the foreskin does not heal but rather becomes inflamed.
And now they also occur on the testicles and foreskin, with blackness and corruption. Therefore you must hollow out all that is already blackened and what wants to rot or has already rotted.
Then apply a poultice on it afterwards with honey that has already been mixed with flour of ground grains and pounded herbs.
Then take care of it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
If however there is a flow of blood, then apply caustic with lunar cautery, according to this method.
For the caustic is useful for two kinds of afflictions at once, namely for a flow of blood and a wound when it becomes corrupted.
And if the head of the leg is corrupted and is destroyed entirely in an hour: then one must insert into the urethra a tube made from lead, so that the sick man may urinate over it.
Adhesions of the foreskin to the head of the penis actually occur in a man whose foreskin is healthy, and circumcision is not required over him. And sometimes adhesions occur due to a wound or an abscess. Therefore, it should be cut with a blunt spatula until the ligament is loosened, and the head of the penis freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish them finely, then it should be cut away a little of the head of the penis and a little from the foreskin. For when the foreskin is fine, it may be pierced quickly on account of its fineness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a linen cloth fine and already wetted in cold water, so that they do not stick together again.
Then it should be treated with wine vinegar until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
Of the cleansing of infants and the cure of errors that occur to them.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity, as are other wounds: however since it is from our operation, by our will, and its use is properly in boys, it is necessary that we mark in it the better operation and the easier way leading to salvation.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired by experience.
Which is because I have found the majority of surgeons and bloodletters to use a razor and with forceps in circumcision, and they also use stitches and ligatures with thread, and an incision with a nail.
And I myself have already tried all these methods and did not find that the cleansing with forceps and stitching with thread was better.
Since in cleansing with a scraper, the skin often escapes. Since the skin of the foreskin has two coats: therefore perhaps the upper skin is struck, and the lower coat remains; it is therefore forced to an incision in order to hit the other, and future pain. And since cleansing which is done by means of a lancet, that is, with the fingers, as surgeons use them, does not secure an incision of the extremity of the male member: because it perhaps enters into its opening.
But in cleansing with a nail, perhaps the iron will escape and corrupt your operation; and indeed the skin of a boy is short-lived by nature, and many times they are born such that they do not need cleansing: and I have already seen this.
But the cleansing with forceps, and bandaging with a thread, has shown me a good example: because the forceps are of proportional cutting: therefore, what is sharp above, is as sharp as what is below. Therefore when you press your hand, the two sharp edges are proportioned and cut simultaneously according to the operation: and a compression is made similar in shape, containing the skin of the foreskin from all parts, with which there does not entirely fall an error.
And the mode of the proper operation is, that you should cause him to suppose, especially a boy if he is one of those who understand somewhat, that you are not doing anything unless you tie a thread on his penis alone and send him until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way as much as you can, because of the recovery of his understanding. Then make him stand between your hands prepared and standing, and not be sitting; and conceal the forceps in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy may see them entirely, nor may he see anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his penis and puff air into the skin, and pull it up until the head of the foreskin comes out. Then cleanse it thoroughly from what accumulates within it as dirt.
Then bind the marked place with a doubled thread. Afterward bind below it, for a little while, another thread secondarily. Then grasp with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligature holding tight, and cut between the two threads. Then lift up the wound quickly, and pull out the head of the thread. Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better) and put powder on top; and over the powder a cloth in which an egg boiled in rosate water has been crushed with rose oil. A recent good wound: and let him be above it until another day; and take care of him with the rest of the cure, until he heals.
However, the shape of the forceps for cleansing is this.
Let the two ends be blunt and let them meet: so that a branch of a nail cannot issue forth from them; and let the length of the two sharp edges be as the length of two equal hands.
But an error occurs in cleansing because perhaps the inner skin escapes entirely or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore you should stretch it forward from your thumb with your fingernail before the place becomes inflamed; and cut it according to equality.
And if you are not able to hold it with your fingernail, then pull it out with forceps and cut it.
But if it has passed three days and the part that is under the thread remains inflamed with an apostema: then let it be, until the warm apostema settles; and strip off the scab easily, and cut it according to how it prepares itself for you: and beware of the head of the thread. For indeed it will not harm him.
Then therefore take care of it with him that consolidates the wound from powders, which we have narrated in the treatise on powders; and if it cuts out of the skin above measure, and escapes to the upper part, it will not harm him either.
Therefore treat it with that which we said, until it heals.
Chapter 58.
On the extraction of a retained splinter in the scrotum.
Retention of urine in the scrotum occurs from a swelling made by stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh that has formed, and similar things from those which we said on modes of cure in division.
And if the swelling does not subside and you see retention of it to be because of a stone already in the neck of the scrotum: then it is necessary that he lie ill on his knees bent. Then his feet are to be placed over his back and he is to stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and the invalid is to take a breath as much as possible for him. Therefore with the scrotum drawn out in front, the stone is forced to come out behind, whereupon the swelling is released.
And if it does not subside with what we said and the matter is severe on the invalid: then it is necessary that you perform its extraction with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form. It should be made of silver, and should be subtle, soft, concave like the tube of a bird's feather in subtlety of radius, long in similarity to the palm of one hand and middle: and the tube should be thin at its head.
And the method of exit of the swelling through it is, that you take a doubled thread and bind a good knot at its end with wool or cotton: and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and cut with scissors if anything superfluous comes out from the wool, but insert into the tube with vehemence as an alembic.
Then anoint the syringe with oil, or with butter, and with egg yolk: and have the invalid sit on a seat, and apply ointment to the scrotum, and to his rod with moist oils and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert a syringe into the penis with ease, until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double it back from the part above the navel.
Then push the syringe inside it until it reaches the bladder and let the sick person feel that it has reached the empty place; and this is not done in this order unless the passage through which it goes is twisted.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For the hernia will follow the wool.
Then pull her out and make the hernia run through the way of urine: and put the syringe back and do not stop doing that until the bladder is evacuated and the sick person finds relief.
Concerning the quality of cathartizing the bladder with a siphon.
Chapter 59.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder or blood freezes in it or pus is compressed within it and urine wishes to be distilled into it with waters and medicines: then make use of the instrument which is called a siphon, and this is its shape.
For it is deaf, that is closed. And in it are three holes, two from one side and one from the other side, as you see.
And the concave place where is that which drives it, should be according to the quantity that suffices for it without addition, until when something is drawn with it from moistures is attracted: and when it is driven, with it is expelled to a distance: according to what the siphon does, in which naphtha, that is Greek fire, is thrown into the lists of Mars.
So when you wish to throw moistures into the bladder, insert the extremity of the siphon into the moisture and draw with it that which drives it upwards; for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the siphon.
Then insert his extremity into a reed, as we have narrated concerning a syringe. Then urge moisture with him as that which urges it reaches the blister immediately, so that a sick person feels it.
The shape of a delicate suppository by means of which the blister is cleansed.
It shall be made from silver or gold: whose head be higher like the tip of a small alkam (reeds used for medicinal purposes) and under it a concavity in which a cord falls.
Then take the blister of a goat, and put into it the moisture with which you wish to cleanse the blister. Then bind it between two concavities with a strong thread doubled as a ligature, and warm the moisture slightly over the fire.
Then insert the extremity of the suppository into a reed, afterwards tighten your hand over the blister with a binding string suitable to it, until the sick person feels that the moisture has already reached the blister.
But if there is no blister present to you, then take a piece of parchment and make out of it a circle, and pierce the same through all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those holes as they unfold. Then gather the circle together like one gathers aloeswood: after which you put into it that which you wish from moist things, and oils, and waters.
Then bind it into the instrument and make with it as you made with the blister from the expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the blister.
Chapter Sixty.
Of the extraction of a Stone.
Now we have spoken in the division of the kinds of the Stone, and its cure with medicines: and I said the difference between the Stone generated in the kidneys, and the blister, and the signs of the whole thing: and I said the Stone on which the operation is done by hand and cutting: and it is the Stone generated properly in the blister: and that which is fixed in a reed: and I am telling you about that one with clear and concise explanation.
I say therefore that a stone generated in the bladder occurs most frequently in boys.
And a sign of it is that the urine comes out from the bladder very fine like water: and there appears to be white sand in it: and the sufferer scratches his private part with it: and labors with it: and often hangs. Then he is raised up, and the anus comes out with him in many of them.
And there is easy healing for boys, as long as they reach fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. But in young people it is of a medium sort, in that which is between the two and its cure is easier if the stone is greater, but on the contrary if small.
When therefore we come to the cure, it is necessary first that we cleanse the patient with a clyster, which takes out all the dung that is in his intestines: for it sometimes prevents the finding of the stone in the examination.
Then let the patient be taken with his feet and shaken and moved towards the lower parts, so that the stone may go down to the depth of the bladder, or sometimes come out from a high place.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under the base of his own body, so that the bladder may slope completely to the lower parts.
Then examine him and touch him externally.
If therefore you feel the stone in place, then hasten immediately with a knife over it.
But if it does not fall under your touch entirely, then you must wipe the index finger of your left hand with oil from your hand, if the patient is a boy; or the middle finger, if he is a young man who has completed his growth: and insert it into his anus, and seek out the stone until it stands steady under your finger: and turn him slowly around to the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it out against the external place of the wound, where you want the section to be. And command one of the attendants to press the swelling (vesica) with his hand, and command another attendant to stretch the testicles upward with his right hand: and with the other hand, remove the skin that is under the testicles in the part opposite to the place of the wound.
Then insert a spatula cut into shape, whose form is this. And find it in that which is between the anus and testicles, not in the middle but to the left side of the navel: and let the section be over the stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let the section be transverse, so that the outer part may be wide and the inner part narrow, according as it may be possible for the stone to come out without being larger.
Perhaps indeed the finger which is in the anus compresses the stone at the section and it comes out without difficulty.
And know that from the stone which has angles and edges, its exit is difficult because of that.
And it is easy to come out, similar to a gland, and round: and its exit is easy.
Therefore to the one who has angles and edges, add something into the fissure.
But if it does not come out that way, then you must think of something else to do over it: or string something over it with a decent gesture, whose end is like the Moon which strings itself over the stone and does not escape from it: or insert a subtle instrument with a curved end underneath it.
But if you cannot do that, then widen the hole a little bit. But if something from blood overcomes you, cut it off with a razor.
If the stone is more than one, then push the larger one into the opening of the swelling first. Then cut over it. Then push a small instrument after it: and similarly do this if there are more in pairs.
But if it is very large, then ignorance lies in cutting upon itself with a great cut. Because an injury happens to the patient either that he may die or a frequent and persistent dripping of urine occurs to him: therefore, because the place is not completely consolidated.
However administer a purging of it, until it goes out: or take hold of its pieces with forceps, until you extract them bit by bit.
Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with gall, and aloes, and dragon's blood: and bind it up, and place over it a cloth infused with oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water: so that the hot swelling may be alleviated.
Then place the patient on his back over a pillow or his own neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day. When therefore you have loosened it, anoint the place with much water and oil.
Then care for him with Diaphnetikon ointment and Basilicon ointment, until he heals.
But if an added and festering swelling, and ulceration, and similar things occur in the wound, such as if blood congeals in a vein, and urine is prevented from flowing from it: and you recognize this by the discharge of blood with urine. Therefore insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood. For if it remains, it provokes the vein to corruption, and its putrefaction.
Then cleanse the wound with vinegar and water, and salt: and apply to it of every kind what is suitable for its cure, until it heals.
And it behooves you during the entire period of cure to bind together the two thighs and join them, because of the medicines which are placed over the place.
If a stone is small, and it is situated in the urethra, and it is stuck there, and its exit is prevented by urine: then cure it with what I narrate before you come to the incision. For often are you excused from an incision through this treatment, for indeed I have already tried it.
And take a perforator of iron soldering rod, whose shape is triangular at the end, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and bind with it the twig under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the piercing iron into the twig with ease, until it reaches the stone: and turn the perforator with your hand in the stone little by little: and you will make a perforation in it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For urine is immediately released.
Then press your hand over what remains of the stone from the outside part of the urethra. For it breaks and is expelled with the urine, and the sick one is healed.
But if this cure is not prepared for you because something prevents it from being done: then bind a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone on the urethra between the two bindings. Then extract it. Later untie the bandage and clean out the frozen blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to bind a thread under the stone except so that it does not return to the bladder: and another bandage above except so that when you untie the thread after the stone's exit, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and because of this you must do this when binding the thread above, that you lift up the skin upwards, that it may return into your body and cover the wound, as we said.
Chapter 61.
On the Extraction of the Stone from Women.
The stone is formed to a small size in women.
But if it happens to any of them that she has a stone, then the cure is difficult and is prohibited because of many rules.
One of these is: that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
And the second one is, because you do not find a woman who will uncover herself to a physician when she is chaste, or from women with husbands.
The third one is, because you do not find a woman who is well-versed in this art, especially the operation with the hand.
And the fourth one is, the distance from the place of the stone; wherefore it requires deep incision, and there is fear.
For if necessity provokes to that, then it is necessary that you take a woman physician, well-versed; and there are few found.
If however you privatize them [the women patients], then seek a chaste physician, subtle, and present a well-learned woman obstetrician knowledgeable in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some part in this art. Then make her present, and above all command her to do everything that you prescribe to her on investigation concerning the stone.
First of all that which is, to see if the woman is a virgin; then it is necessary that she insert her finger into her anus and seek out the stone.
If therefore she finds it [the stone], let her cover it under her finger, and then command the obstetrician to insert her finger into the vulva of the infirm woman and inquire about the stone, after placing her hand left over the vesica and compressing it with good pressure.
If therefore she finds the stone, then it is necessary that she gradually move it from the opening of the vagina to the lower parts with all her strength, until she comes to the root of the hip.
Then he cuts on him above the opposition of the middle of the jaw at the root of the hip, from whatever part it is prepared for him, and he feels a stone in that part; and his finger does not move away from the stone, constricting under it: and let the cut be small at first. Then he introduces a reed over that incision.
Then he introduces a reed over that incision. If therefore he feels the stone, then let him add to the incision as much as is proportional to what stone issues from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. From these is the small and the large, soft and rough, long and round with branches.
Know therefore its kinds, so that it may be signified to you through this over what you wish.
If therefore blood holds sway over you, then add to the place crushed myrrh and hold it for one hour until the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until the stone goes out; and do as you have prepared with instruments which I said for the extraction of a stone in the bladder, so that they may aid you through them in your operation.
But if bleeding holds sway over you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which was cut: then put dust over the place, and bind him with a decent compressing bandage: and do not change it; and let the stone go, and do not extract it. Perhaps indeed the weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood is stilled after days and the place becomes putrid, then return to your operation until the stone comes out.
Chapter LXII.
A section above the Hydrorach (Hydroureter)
The hydrorach is not a stone, unless it is an aggregation of moisture in the scrotal sac white part, which is under the skin containing the seed; and it is called the scrotal sac.
And at times it is found in its own sheath, which nature prepared for itself on the scrotum, until it becomes putrid; which is another kind of sac and skin of the testicle between its two layers of fat. And that does not happen often.
And the generation indeed of this cord is from the weakness that happens to the testicles: wherefore this matter flows towards them. And at times it occurs due to a blow against the testicles.
And this moisture is having many colors. For indeed its colour is inclined to yellowishness, or it is reddish bloody, or it is fecal and black, or it is watery white, and that is most often.
And the signs by which one knows where the aggregation of water is, are these. For if it is in the white layer that we mentioned, then the abscess is round in length for a little while like the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, since the moisture contains it from all parts.
And if there is moisture in its own sheath, then the abscess is round with an egg-like part, and for this reason man supposes that it is another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white layer, then it will fall under sense.
When therefore you wish to have knowledge of the colour of the moisture, then try out the colour of the moisture in the abscess with a square instrument which has preceded in shape. According to what comes out therefore in the track of the inserted thing, judge about that which is between it.
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you order the patient to be bled if it is possible for him, and you see his body full.
Then he will be placed on his back over a high thing somewhat, and place many cloths under him.
Then sit yourself over the left side of him, and command your attendant to sit on his right side, who should extend his rod across one or two sides of the scrotum, and into the region of the navel.
Then take a broad spatula and cut the skin of the testicles in half along its length as far as possible towards the navel: and let the incision be made according to straightness on an equal line which divides the skin of the testicles until it reaches the white ligament: and clean him out and observe, or beware lest you cut into himself: and let your cleaning be that by which you cleanse him from the part that hangs down like an egg more: and carefully search with cleansing according to as much as is possible for you.
Then pierce the white ligament full of water with a wide piercing, and draw out all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the section with a hook, and stretch out the white ligament upwards, and do not touch the skin of the testicles that surrounds it: and cut the white ligament in such a way as is possible for you to cut it, either entirely or piecemeal, especially its thin side. For if you do not carefully search into it, there will be no security in the cut of it, lest the water return.
But if the egg proceeds externally from its wound during your operation hour: then when you have completed the section of the ligament, return it. Then gather together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then take care of it as you do other wounds, until it heals.
But if you find the egg corrupted by blackness, then it is necessary to tie up the vessels, which are the suspenders, fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspender, and draw out the egg; afterwards take care of it as we said.
If indeed water is accumulated in two parts, then know that there are two branches: therefore cut the other part equally as you did to the one.
And if it is equal to you, so that it should be one operation, then do this: then wipe away the blood. And insert a thread soaked in oil or rose oil into the sections, and put another thread which you dipped in wine and oil outside it, and spread it over the two testicles and the entrails, and put folded cloths above them, and they are small sacs: and bind them above with a suture that has six threads according to this form.
Then two cloths are taken and are sewn together, and they are filled with the crimsoned linen according to this likeness: and they make the extremities by which it is pressed from the belly or moist wool: and they gather them along with the suture in the loin of the arms: and one extremity takes hold from the anus up to the back, and the second takes hold at the part of the breast: and two other extremities above the lower thighs, and two other extremities above the inguinals, and the whole suture is gathered together in the loin of the arms.
And sometimes artificially this branch is treated with a cautery in the place of the section by iron: and it is as if you take a sharp-edged knife-like cautery, and cut with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according to what we have narrated: until when a white pus containing water is shown: then take the cautery, according to this form.
It is assimilated to Greek letters.
Then pierce with it the pus and it is ignited, until all moisture comes out.
Then extend the pus with a hook and peel it off with a sharp-edged ignited cautery, and cut into itself as much as is possible for you, until all its roots are eradicated.
And beware that it not touch fire with itself.
And know that this operation is more safe and farther from the flowing of blood, and better than the operation with incision.
But if a contrariety happens to you in the hour of incision, or in the hour of cauterizing an aposteme warm, or flux of blood, or something else: then it behoves that you cure what contrariety is happening to you from it with a treatment that suits it, according as has been aforementioned.
But if the ailing person is timid and does not await this operation because of his frightfulness: then administer a perforation according to what I tell you, and it is.
When you have been assured with yourself by what we said about the signs, that the ramex is watery: then it behoves that you make the ailing person sit on an elevated chair.
Then pierce the aposteme in its lower part with a broad spatulum and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water runs out.
Then place over the cleansed area a bandage and bind it, and let it be until the remaining water runs out: then take care of it, until the wound is healed.
But if the contrariety is of the flowing out of water at the hour when you pierce it, and it is not for this reason alone, because a white membrane makes contrariety in the wound orifice and prevents the exit of water: then it behoves that you insert a feather into the wound, or an instrument with which water from abscesses is drawn out, whose shape has been mentioned before: or add a little bit to the operation of the wound.
And know that the water returns and gathers after six months, or thereabouts. When therefore it is gathered, then it should be perforated in the same manner, and the ailing person will pass through his days.
Chapter Sixty-Three.
Of the care for wounds of the flesh.
You should know that in the incision above this wound, there is from fear leading to harm in many dispositions. Therefore it seems to me that its dismissal would save from it.
And I am recalling the treatment of it, and the appearance of the aposteme.
Therefore I say, that many apostemes occur in the bodies, from which carbuncles are formed: and this is done for many causes, namely.
Or from an excess of sharp or acute fluid that flows to the testicles. Or from a blow.
And the color of the aposteme is according to the color of the body, and no pain is found in it, and it is a grave aposteme.
And perhaps it is a stony aposteme, whose color is darkish, and there is no sense in it.
And sometimes it occurs from the clotting of arteries and their inflation: as I have already recalled its mention; or from the inflation of the veins.
Which therefore is from them from the inflation of the arteries, is recognized by the arrangement of the aposteme, when you compress it with your fingers. And it should not be touched at all.
But that which occurs from the inflation of the veins, does not dissipate anything under a pressing with fingers.
And now it is possible that an incision be made over this kind and over the remaining flesh, and that one cuts the skin of the testicles. Then stretch the scrotum upwards and draw out the testicle with a white cord, and free the suspensory ligament from the veins, and bind the veins; and make an incision in the suspensory ligament after you have freed it from all parts of the scrotum.
So if the scrotum is consolidated with those born flesh tissues, then you should grasp the testicle and make an incision in it.
And if the adhesion is between something from a spleen or in what is between the vesicles: then it is necessary that you free the entire adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
But if it is the birth of flesh at the place of adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary that you cut all of it and take out the placenta, as we said.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool steeped in rose oil and wine: thereafter care for it with the remaining treatment, until it heals.
Chapter 64.
On the cure of Wounds which are with Vinegar.
Vine is a swelling wrapped around with some kind of wrapping, similar to an abscess, with the softening of the testicles: and it makes movement and exercise difficult over a weak person, and walking.
And in the cure of this illness is from fear, because of the thing that came before its remembering.
But it is necessary to say that the operation for it is done according to what the first ones did.
I therefore say, that you should have the sick person sit on a high elevated seat. Then push the supporter of the testicles downwards. Then take the skin of the testicles with your fingers, along with the vessels that are near the root: and have another servant hold it, and stretch it with a strong stretching.
Then cut with a sharp bistoury having a broad blade, a transverse incision directly on the vessels, until the vessels are revealed.
Then scrape away from all parts, as we said to you in the removal of arteries which are in the scalp.
Then insert a needle into them with a thread which is double the size of the filament, and tie it first at the places where the Vine occurs: and then tie it again at their last ones. Then cut them in the middle straight according to the length of the body, and draw out what is accumulated from corrupted putrid humors.
Then care for the wound with the treatment of other wounds, from which a discharge of pus is to be generated, so that the vessels nourishing one of the testicles may fall. For it is not bad through it.
But if the vein is cut with all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles themselves are drawn out because of this, along with their vessels: so that the sperm may not be deprived of nourishment on account of the incision, and wither away or perish, and there would be no benefit with them.
Chapter 65.
About the care for ruptured intestines.
The outcome of this rupture is from an incision which occurs in the navel extended over the belly in the part of the groin from the inside of the abdomen.
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from a hernia, or its extension.
And these two kinds occur from many causes. Or from a blow. Or a jump. Or shouting. Or the lifting of something heavy, and similar things.
And a sign is shown when it is from an extension of the hernia. It is that which happens gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly: and it is an ecchymosis equal in size against the depth: therefore, because the hernia compresses the intestine.
And a sign of it when it is from the cutting of the hernia, because it makes a severe pain suddenly occur from its beginning: and there is an ecchymosis different, appearing near the skin: and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and its course to the exterior of the hernia.
And sometimes it emerges with the intestine a tumor-like growth: and this is called the intestinal reed, and the zirbia: and sometimes it occurs with inflammation.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine feces, and is retained there: and with it is the harm of the sick man: because it causes to occur evil pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the cure of this disease species with iron there is fear: wherefore it behooves that a case be guarded against in it.
And the method of the operation is, that you command the sick man to reduce his intestine by hand to the inner parts of his own concavity, if he obeys the return. Then it is raised up over his neck between your hands: and lift up his legs.
Then extend the skin which follows the skin upwards, and cut the skin of the testicles entirely along its length. Then fix in the two lips of the incision needles, according as you are able to open the incision with them: and let the incision be of such size, that it may be possible for an egg to come out of it.
Then peel the siphac, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when it is uncovered the white, hard siphac from every part: then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white siphac, which is under the shell of the egg, and the second siphac, and separate entirely with it the adhesion that is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move it with the right hand to the inner skin of the testicles: and when this extends the white siphac upwards with the left hand: and lift up the egg with the siphac to the part of the incision: and command the servant, that he extend the egg upwards: and you loosen the adhesion, which is behind the completed operation.
And inquire with your fingers, that there be nothing at all there of the intestine wrapped up in the hard white siphac. If however something is found inside him from it: then push it downwards into his belly.
Then take the needle in which is a thick thread, made from ten threads: and insert it near the back part of the sifach, that is, the pouch, under the skin of the testicles which follows the incision: then cut off the ends which project from the thread, until there are four threads. Then tie certain ones on top of others in a shape like that which is in the form of a cross: and ligate with them the sifach, of which we spoke, because it is under the skin of the testicles with strong ligaments, until no vessel that nourishes them can send anything to them: so that an hot apostema may not occur. And put another ligament outside the first ligature, far from it by less than two fingers. And after these two ligatures release from the sifach, which is under the skin of the testicles, a quantity equal to the size of a finger: and cut off the rest entirely according to its roundness, and take out the egg.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles a incision, from which blood and pus flow: as we narrated above.
Then apply wool soaked in oil, and put it into the wound: and apply the ligature which we have mentioned. And sometimes a cauterization is made on the white sifach that we mentioned, after its incision, fearing a flow of blood. For it often happens. And let the ligature go, until it falls on its own.
If however its fall is delayed, then it will be fomented with warm water: and put on top of it what we mentioned, until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the remaining cure of wounds, until it is cured.
Chapter Sixty-six.
About a bruised vein.
In this case, I have not seen anyone dare to attempt a cure for it with iron.
And the first thing they said is that it is treated just as we have described in the case of a vein that has burst from being cut. Which is to tie the vessels below after cutting over them with ease; then cut in the middle and cure it finally with what opens it, until the vessels fall; and cure the wound, as we said, until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-seven.
About a rupture that occurs in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we said, and the swelling appears, and does not descend to the testicles anything from the intestines: and if it does descend, it is little and returns in all hours: but if prolonged with that time, a fissure forms in the scrotum, until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And it occurs from the swelling of the scrotum that is in the groin, as we said. Which is because the scrotum swells; then it becomes soft and suppurates, and the place swells.
And its cure is with a cautery, just as we have previously described.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, according to this method: and thus, the patient lies on his back between your hands. Then cut the place of the rupture's swelling and supuration with a cut across its width, according to the size of three fingers.
Then tie up the scrotum and what is under the skin until when it is uncovered white tissue that follows it.
Then take an iron rod and place it over the swelling in the scrotum, and press it to a depth into the abdomen.
Then when the two swellings are above the end of the iron rod in the scrotum, and attach one to the other with a stitch; then pull out the end of the iron rod.
And you must not puncture a fistula altogether, nor draw out an abscess, nor anything else, as I have instructed you to know in the cure of gut wounds.
Then its cure is by the treatment for wounds. Therefore when you cut the filaments, clean that, and restore the wound until it becomes stable.
For a suture contracts, and does not increase the prominence of the rupture.
And cauterizing is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
Chapter 68.
About softening the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles often becomes softened in certain men, because of which the flesh between them is also softened and their appearance is fouled.
Therefore it is necessary for the person who is asked to treat this that he make the sick man lie on his back and cut off all the softened skin that has formed over the natural skin.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture, and if you want to, first tie three or four stitches of the softened skin that has become superfluous, and then secure a firm suture.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it with the treatment for other wounds until it heals and the sutures fall out.
Chapter 69.
About Castration.
Know that castration is forbidden by our law and I am not permitted to remind of it in my book, unless for two reasons.
One reason is so that the physician may know about it when he is asked about it and be able to know its cure for whoever suffers from it.
And the other reason is that we frequently need to castrate certain animals for our farm animals, such as rams, he-goats, and male cats, and similar ones.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways. Or by abrasion. Or by incision and cutting.
However, the way of performing that which is done by abrasion is this: we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles become soft and relaxed, and then with your hand you scrape them away until they are dissolved and do not feel under touch.
But in the castration that is done by incision and cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then bind the suspensory ligament and cut above the whole mass with a single cut until when they proceed two masses: then incise them after you have skinned both of them, and do not leave on top of them anything except the thin siphac which is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by abrasion because abrasion perhaps leaves something from the testicles so that the animal desires to mate.
Then take care of the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
Of the cure of a Hermaphrodite in two ways.
A Hermaphrodite is made from males in two ways. One of them is because it appears in that which follows the space, or on the skin of the testicles, in that which is between the two testicles, a figure like a woman's wound, where there are hairs: and sometimes urine flows from what is on the skin of the testicles.
But in women there is one kind and it is a woman's wound on the pectoral region just like the small testicles of a man are entirely prominent on the outside: one of which is like the penis of a man and two like two testicles.
And the cure of these three kinds, two from males and one from a female, is that it is necessary to cut the added flesh until their impression flees. Then the cure of these wounds is treated with the same cure as other wounds.
However, in a specific wound of the testicles from which urine issues and is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor its cure at all.
Chapter Seventy-One.
On the incision of the labia and the fleshy prominence in women's wounds.
A growth perhaps is added to the natural part until it becomes foul and ugly in appearance. And sometimes it grows so large in some women that it expands as much as in men, and reaches as far as the genitals.
It is necessary therefore that you grasp the superfluity of the labia with your hand or with a pair of tweezers and cut it, and do not finish cutting in the depth of the root so as not to cause a flow of blood.
Then its cure is treated with the same cure as for wounds, until it heals.
But the flesh that grows is the flesh that grows in the opening of the womb, until it fills it up. And sometimes it issues forth to the exterior according to the resemblance of a tail: and on account of this some people first name the disease a caudated affliction. It is necessary therefore that we cut it out as we cut out the labia and treat it until it heals.
On the cure of a rupture, which is an unbroken wound in a woman.
Chapter Seventy-Two.
A rupture is that which is a wound in a woman not broken through or pierced, or be it a small hole. And it is either natural or accidental.
The accidental one is from an illness that preceded it, and it itself comes about either from flesh that has grown and been added, or from a thin membrane, or from a thick one. And it occurs either in the depth of the womb, or on its sides, or in its upper part, or lower part. And it prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and possibly menstruation.
And knowledge of this comes through the observation of the midwife, if a hernia is apparent nearby.
But if it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with a stick.
But if the hernia is from a thin and subtle membrane, and is near to both lips: then hasten and tear it.
And it is, as you place on two lips, poulilles.
Then place your fingers of both hands together, and the woman be on her back with her legs spread. Then stretch out the two lips with force, until the thin membrane is torn and the hernia is opened.
Then take a cloth, and soak it in oil, and place it on the spot: and have the woman heat up every day, so that the place does not grow stiff instead.
But if the membrane is thick and dense: then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
But if the hernia is from a tumor of flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut it: and be with you medicines that stop the flow of blood without bleeding, as aloe, and dragon's blood, and husk gathered with the membranes of an egg.
Then administer a cannula made of lead, that the wound does not quickly become stiff, keep it for several days: and administer linen applied dry, then take care of the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
And sometimes other flesh-born things are born in the womb: therefore it is necessary that they be cut according to this method: since there is no cancerous ulcer that is not contrary to iron entirely.
Chapter 73.
¶ On the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and red boils on the wounds of women.
Hemorrhoids are the dilation of the openings of the veins, until much blood flows out from them constantly.
When therefore hemorrhoids become old, they are called thetheli. And I have already spoken of their kinds and signs in the division of species; and I will now say what from them receives cure and what does not.
I therefore say that hemorrhoids which are in the vulvar opening and do not appear to sense: then there is no cure for it with iron.
However those from them that are in the vulvar opening above which sense falls, are those which receive cure.
It is necessary therefore that you introduce the woman into a cold house. Then stretch out the thetheli with forceps or with a rough cloth and cut them off from their roots.
Then powder over them at the flow of blood from one powdered without bitterness as acacia and dragon's blood and thyme and similar things.
Then push her feet against the wall for an hour. Afterwards put her into cold water.
But if the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall and similar things.
Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with it on her back.
If therefore the blood is dried up with that it is good and if not make the sores adhere to her back without scarification.
Then take wool and dip it into the juice of taracti or the juice of agrimony or the juice of Alhala trees that is agaric Pontic wine and make it adhere to the place.
When therefore the swelling subsides, then treat the place with ointments until it heals.
Albath is a red plant similar to the heads of Alhassa and has a rough appearance.
It is necessary therefore that you cut what appears from it, according to what I said about the thetheli equally; and treat it, until it heals.
Chapter 73.
On the perforation of the uterus which occurs in the womb.
There occur in the womb many kinds of ulcers, such as cancer, and stony ulcers, and sores, and inflamed, and itching, that is herpes, carbuncles, fistulas, hemorrhoids, ragadiae, and theril, and hot ulcers.
And I myself have already said all these afflictions and kinds of them, and their signs, and their cures in the division: it is necessary for me to say in this treatise about hot ulcers which occur in the womb, when they are from ulcers that collect pus, and you wish to know how its opening is done with iron.
It is therefore necessary for you to consider. Then if the pain of the ulcer in its beginning is sharp with its percussion and inflammation and fever: and you see it to be red: if it presses heavily on itself, then do not hasten with its perforation: and cure it with that which helps for its maturation, until when the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
Then it is necessary for you to make the woman sit on a stool which has two armrests, and recline, or be laid over her back, and gather her feet towards the lower part of the abdomen: and let her hips be spread apart, and she place her arms under her knees, and bind each with a suitable ligament to it.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and administer the instrument by which the opening of the womb is made.
And it is necessary when you wish to administer this instrument that you insert it with a finger into the depth of the womb of the woman, so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb and does not hurt her.
If however the instrument shall be deeper than profound, then it behoves thee to lay poultices on the surface of the profound matrix: so that the entry of the entire instrument into the profound matrix may be prevented. And it behoves thee to place the whorl, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side over: and to hold fast the instrument, and to turn again the whorl until the profound matrix is opened.
Since therefore exitura appears and is touched with the hand and is soft and smooth: then it behoves thee to cut off itself near its head with a flat spatula.
When therefore the purulence is evacuated, then it behoves thee to place a linen cloth steeped in rose oil: or green oil, in which there may be some heat: and place the cloth, and draw out the section into the profound matrix.
And place on the outside over the matrix a clean wool compress soaked in water in which mulberries have been boiled.
Then it shall be cared for after two days with an ointment that is suitable to it, until it heals.
And when the matrix and wound are to be washed, so that they are cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled: then it shall return to the ointment.
But if the wound is hidden within the matrix, then it behoves thee to refrain from treating it with iron, nay rather treat it with that which we said in division.
Chapter 70.
A Treatise on the Midwives, how they heal living embryos, according to unnatural figure having emerged.
It is necessary for the Midwife, first to know the natural figure of birth.
From the signs therefore it is, that when you see a woman compressing herself downwards, and desiring to breathe the air, and she finds relief above her on what is of the birth, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and its exit is over her head, with the cord and it along with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When therefore you see these signs, then it is necessary that his belly be compressed, so that the embryo may quickly descend.
For when it has descended on its own head, the second skin descends with it, and is cleansed of those excess things by good cleansing.
But that which is outside this birth is unnatural, inadmissible.
Because sometimes the fetus comes out over its own feet, and comes out of its body before its head, and its feet and hands together, or one foot: or comes out its head and hands: or comes out the entrails: and perhaps turns back over its neck, and such things from detestable forms.
It is necessary therefore that the midwife be prudent and subtle in all these things, and beware for herself from error and deception: and I am showing every form among them, and how the mind is in it, and let it be signified by it, and let her stand over it.
When the fetus comes out over its own head in a natural birth, and it becomes severe over the woman, and the labor becomes difficult for her, and you see that her strength is already weakened: then make her sit on a chair, or have women hold her: and vapour her vulva with fenugreek cooked, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert between her fingers a small spatula and find with it the membrane, and wipe it with her finger, until what is in it from moisture runs out: and press on the woman's belly, until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be purged with a mucilage of fenugreek, with sesame oil.
Then order her after the purging that she be compressed, and have her sneeze with a condiment, and hold her mouth and nose at the same time. For the foetus will issue forth immediately.
But if two hands of the foetus are first to be issued, it is necessary that you reduce them with some facility little by little. But if it does not obey on entering, then place the woman over a seat, and lift her feet upwards; then strike the seat against the ground: and the woman must be held so as not to fall by the shock.
Therefore if the hands do not issue and the foetus dies: then cut them and take out the remainder of the foetus: and bind his hand with cloth, and take him out with care: for he will issue.
The exit of the embryo over its feet. When the foetus issues over its own feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards; afterwards turn the foetus little by little; then straighten him.
Then take one of his feet and stretch it out little by little.
When therefore they issue up to the hips, then command her that she be compressed, and make her spit with a condiment: for it will come out, if God wishes.
And if it does not issue with what we have narrated, then reduce the foetus little by little, until you place him according to his natural shape. For he will come out then with easy delivery.
But if it is prevented with all that we have narrated: then take of the paste of aloes, and oil of fennel, and gum dissolved; and strike the whole in a mortar with good pounding; afterwards smear him with the cloth of woman's womb, and lower part of her belly. Then make her sit in warm water, until there is a looseness.
When therefore you see that already the lower parts of her are warmed up, then make her take suppositories of myrrh; and insert them. When therefore she holds the suppository for one hour, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her sneeze: and bind tight her mouth and nose: and press the lower part of her stomach with easy compression. For the fire will issue forth at once.
The exit of the fetus over the knees and hands. When it issues forth in this form, then it will make its way by slowly inserting its hands. Then the woman is placed on her back over a pillow, and her feet are hanging down below: and she herself lies on a bed, and folds her hands. Then press upon her stomach slowly. Then draw out what is under her feet from the bedding, until it be prepared below. And if the fetus does not issue forth, then take her feet and move them with a violent motion. Then press that which is above the navel slowly, until the fetus ascends to the upper part. Then she should insert her hands and equalize the fetus slowly: and instruct the woman to be compressed until the fetus issues forth.
The exit of the fetus hanging out sideways from the hands. It will make its way down by the lowering of her hand. But if she is unable to reduce it, then lift up the woman and make her walk.
And if she is unable to walk, then make her lie on a bed and strike her thighs with violent shaking.
Then administer the liniment which you prepared from the poultices.
And if she takes it a birth, then make her sit on a chair. Then strive to reduce the hand and equalize the fetus according to its natural shape: and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to compress herself until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus over its mother's neck, with hands extended, and its face towards the back of its mother. The midwife should grasp the hand of the fetus, then turn it gradually, and equalize its position.
When therefore it is equalized, then place over the mouth of him what we have mentioned from oil and ointments.
Then command him to be moved gradually. When therefore you have done that, then make her sit on a chair, and command her to lean to the right side. Then command her to be compressed; and make her sneeze when you have given her [the draught].
The exit of the fetus prepared on the side. When it has descended to the maternal opening according to this method with a cord, then cut the cord with your finger, until it is evacuated of moisture.
If therefore it is suspended over the face and neck of the fetus, then cut her from the navel: so that she may not be retained, and perish.
Then push the fetus inward, until you have placed it as it should be; and command the woman to compress herself several times: for he himself will come out with a slight exit.
The exit of twins, or many fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three, and four. However it is an outsider, and rarely happens.
However five is a thing outside of nature, and they do not live at all: and they are contained, although they multiply, by one cord: and they are separated by the siphac, distinguishing between them the ligament in the navel of each of them.
And sometimes they come out like a single fetus comes out naturally and easily: and they come out with an unlaudable exit, as we have narrated.
And if some of them are difficult at childbirth and arrive at that which we said from unnatural figures, then care for them as we have narrated: and let the midwife be subtle, and do what she does with ease and slowness, and ingenue it according to every figure with him who prepares something for him from ingenious leading to salvation.
A recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos, and they miscarry.
At times a single one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and it has been verified to me that a woman miscarried seven, and fifteen others, all formed.
That which has happened by the measurement of the glorious wise one.
Therefore, all this ought to be in the knowledge of the obstetrician. Perhaps it will arrive at her similarly afflicted: so let him oppose it with that which is necessary.
Chapter 76.
About the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you are treating a dead fetus with what I said in the division of medicine, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then it is necessary for you to consider.
So if the woman is of sound virtue and is not with some accident from which loss would be feared for her: then it is necessary for her to be laid out on a bed, on her back, and have her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and a servant should hold her from two sides, or she should be bound to the bed, so that her body may not move during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the mouth of the womb with oily liquids mixed with aloes and fenugreek and flaxseed.
Then the obstetrician should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages, then insert it into the womb with ease. Then she should ask the woman where to place the hooks from the fetus and what places are fitting for that.
So consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend upon its head: then insert the hooks into its eyes, or on its neck, or on its mouth, or on its palate, or under its chin, or at the joints of its limbs, or in nearby places near the ribs, and under the hollows.
If however the descent is upon his feet, then on the breastbone, and middle ribs of him.
And it is necessary for him to hold the hook with his right hand; and to place the curvature of it on that which is between the fingers of his left hand: and he shall insert with his hand with ease, and fasten the hook into one of those places which we said, until he reaches the empty space.
Then he shall fasten another hook into opposition to it, or a third one, if needed: so that there is an equal contraction, and it does not decline to the side.
Then it shall be extended with an equal extension, and not merely according to a straight line, but rather it shall move to all parts, so that its exit is eased: just as happens when a tooth is being extracted.
And it is necessary in that which is between them, so that the extension may be softened. But if a part is retained from it, then the obstetrician should apply some fingers with oil, and insert them on the side, so that he may turn out with them what is being retained.
So if a part of the fetus comes out, then the hooks should be changed to another place that is higher: do this until the entire fetus comes out.
So if a hand comes out ahead of the rest, and it is not possible to return it because of its constriction: then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it. Then draw it out until the whole thing comes out; cut it at the junction of the wrist or elbow: and do this with the other hand and two feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is constriction on its exit, or there is water gathered in it: then it is necessary that a spiny spatula be inserted between his fingers and he shall cut with it the head, and draw out the water; or he shall break it up with an instrument called Almisdac: whose form comes with shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
Similarly he should act if the fetus is of a large head nature, then it is necessary for him to cut quickly: or pull it out with a misdach, as we said. Then you will grasp the bones with forceps.
But if the head will come out and be caught at the pelvis: then it is split open, until the moisture which is in the chest pours out.
And if it does not come to a close and will not obey the exit: then cut the head into bits, as much as is possible for you.
And if the lower belly has an abscess, or is in it dropsy: then it is necessary for him to pierce it, until the moisture runs out of it.
But if indeed the fetus is above its feet, then its traction is easy and its direction towards the mother's birth canal is light.
But if it is caught at the belly or chest: then it is necessary for him to pull it out with a cloth which you wrapped over your hand: and split open the belly or chest, until what is in them flows out.
But if the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns: then the midwife will insert her left hand. And if the mother's birth canal is open, then she will insert her hand into the depth of the birth canal, and seek out with it the head, and pull it with fingers until the mouth of the birth canal: then she will insert in it a hook or two hooks, and pull it with them.
And if the mother's birth canal is constricted, because of the warm abscess that has occurred to it: then it is not necessary for her to be worked upon with it, rather it is necessary now to administer an effusion of moist things, greasiness: and apply emplastrum: and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on its side, then it is possible that it will be born normally: then let what we said about a living fetus be administered.
If it is not possible for that, then it should be cut little by little, and it should be extracted.
And you must make sure to leave nothing at all from the string inside entirely.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then administer what we said about hot blisters which occur in wombs.
And if there occurs a flow of blood, then let it descend into hot waters and administer the remaining cure.
And I myself have already seen a woman whose belly was dead with a fetus, then she became pregnant over it with another in its place, afterwards the other fetus died also. It happened therefore to her after a long time an abscess occurred in her navel and it was swollen until it was opened and she began to discharge pus.
I was therefore summoned for the cure of her, and I treated her for a long time: and the wound was not consolidated.
So I placed on it some plasters of strong adhesion, and it came out from its place. Then a few days passed for her, and another mouth came out. I was therefore amazed from that, since there is no mouth inside the belly.
So I thought that they were of the bones of a dead fetus.
I therefore asked the wound and I took out many bones, the woman being in better dispositions herself: and now she has lived thus for a long time, and sends from its place a little pus.
And I did not leave this foreign thing firm here, except that it has knowledge and assistance to that which the skilled physician administers with his hand in the cure.
Chapter 77.
About the shapes of instruments necessary for the extraction of a fetus.
The shape of the vertigo by which the uterus is opened.
Below is the form of a Strictorium, by which books are measured, to which two handles are equally attached at both ends of two wooden beams. However, this vertigo must be finer than a suture thread. And it can be made either from ebony or from the wood of the box tree.
And let the width of all the wood be as two fingers: and the edge of each is as one finger. And its length is a palm and half: and in the middle of the two woods are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are already secured to both, whose length is a half-palm and somewhat more: and their width is as two fingers or somewhat more.
And those two additions are inserted into the mother's womb, so that it may be opened with them when you turn back the two vertigos.
Another form similar to it, finer and lighter.
Let it be made from the wood of ebony or box, according to the shape of forceps. However, at its end there are two additions, as you see above: and the length of each addition is a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
Therefore, when you wish to open the uterus with it, then have the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging down, and the opening between her legs be uncovered. Then insert those two additions joined together into the uterus: and you are holding the end of the instrument below her hips. Then open your hand with the instrument, just as you do with forceps, equally in size to what you wish to be the opening of the uterus mouth, until the midwife does what she wants.
The shape of another vertigo which the ancients called The Impeller by means of which the fetus is driven out.
The shape of the Almisdac, by means of which the great head is crushed, and it resembles forceps, with teeth at its end, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that something is bent, like pincers in this shape, as you see, with teeth like the teeth of saws, by which it is cut and crushed.
The shape of a pair of pincers having one spike.
The shape of a pair of pincers having two spikes.
The shape of scissors having two ends for cutting off the head.
The shape of two broad scissors as well.
All these instruments are exercised and the more their forms are multiplied, and they are prepared by the craftsman, the quicker he is at his operation, and more esteemed among men because of their quantity.
Therefore do not despise any of them, lest it be prepared in front of you. For their necessity is inexcusable.
Chapter 78.
About the extraction of a second-degree (thing).
When a second-degree thing is retained at birth, then it should be given to the weak one, so that she retains her breath. Then make her sneeze with the condiment, and press your hand over her mouth, and her nose. And if it then comes out by this means, it is good.
If not: then take a vessel and pierce in its lid an opening: and put into it herbs that open the mouth of the womb, as calaminth, rue, and anniseed, and chamomile, and sesame, and cassia wood, and centaury: take all these herbs or some of them and immerse them in water and put them over the fire.
Then place a piece of reed wood over the opening of the lid of the vessel, and the other end in the mouth of the womb, and hold it until the vapor reaches the heat of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said. For subsequently the Secundina will come out with ease.
But if it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then instruct the midwife to dip her hand into oil of siseam or almond paste. Then she should insert it into the womb and seek out the Secundina with it. When therefore she has found it, then let her take it and stretch it out gradually.
But if it is attached deeply within the womb, then she should insert her hand, as we have said, until she finds the Secundina and draws it out gradually along its length so that the womb does not fall due to violent traction: rather it should be turned with ease to the right and left side; then it should be added in quantity of attraction. For itself will then obey, and be preserved, and escape from adherence.
But if the womb's mouth is constricted, as we have already told you: treat it with sneezing and by medicine of the cauldron with herbs.
But if it does not come out with all that we have told you: then beware lest you weary yourself over her in the repetition of extraction.
But it should be bound to the woman's thigh where what comes out from it goes into the mouth of the womb. Then cleanse her with the ointment of Tetrapharmakon. For it itself will corrupt her after days and dissolve and come out.
But when it putsrefies, a bad smell rises up to the stomach and head, and hurts that sick woman. It is necessary therefore that suitable fumigations be administered for it.
Some of the ancients have already experienced a fumigation of nasturtium and dried fig.
The form of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated in the hope of retaining the Secondina and her menses.
Let it be made from wood similar to almond or rush: and let the broad end be placed over fire: and the fumigation be put above embers: let her hold it, until that fumigation is consumed: and let her repeat another.
Chapter 79.
About the cure of an unperforated abscess.
Many children are born and their abscesses are unperforated which have already been beset by a subtle inflammation. Therefore, the midwife should pierce that inflammation with her finger: and if not, she should pierce it itself with a sharp spatulum: and beware the arm, lest it touch it.
Then place on top of it wool steeped in wine and oil. Then care for it with ointments, until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will suppurate, then place a lead tube into the abscess on many days, and it is to be removed when the child wants to pass urine.
And now suppurating of an abscess also occurs from the closure of a wound or from an apostema. Therefore it is necessary that the consolidation be cut out, then it should be cured with what we said about the abscess and lead.
Chapter 80.
About the cure of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are nodulation and thickening which occur near the anus outside: or in a space of one part: and it is a fistula one, or many.
When therefore the nodulation becomes old, it opens and flows out of it a white aqueous humidity, or a subtle purulence.
And sometimes they are penetrating from these fistulas. Therefore the penetrating ones are recognized by what comes out from their emission and flatulence, when a sick person uses emission: and perhaps worms come out of them.
And they are fistulas when they penetrate into space up to the bladder and up to the root of the penis. And they are penetrating up to the joint of the hip and up to the nodule of the tailbone.
But from the fact that a fistula penetrating up to the anus is known even if it does not penetrate, is this: you insert your index finger into the anus and you insert a thin probe into the fistula made of air or iron; when there is no twisting.
But if there is a twisting in it, then insert into it a thin probe made of lead or a bristle from horsehairs until you feel the probe or bristle with your finger.
But if you do not feel it at all, nor does anything come out through the orifice from an emission, nor inflammation, nor worm as I said: then know that it is non-penetrating; therefore hurry to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the bladder or to the urine duct then its significance is the exit of urine from it and prohibition of this so that the place may be consolidated with medicines.
But if it is penetrating up to the joint of the hip or to the bone of the hip then its sign is that a probe reaches that far if there is no twisting up to the bone and finding of pain in the surrounding part and what comes out pus from it always and that medication does not succeed in it nor does it consolidate with ointment.
And in all these fistulas penetrating there is no cure at all and the treatment of them is toil and vanity for foolish doctors, who are formed over him.
But in that one which is not penetrating and not old, there is hope for healing with a needle: according to what I tell you, and I have already proved it. And it is, that the infirm person lies between your hands on his back: and raise up his legs until above his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his belly. Then he introduces a lead or air probe into the fistula, if there is a twisting of it, until you know where the probe has reached.
But if the patient feels it around the anus, then you should introduce your index finger into the anus.
So if then you feel that the probe has penetrated through itself and is detected apart from what you feel between your finger and it, or the flesh: therefore you will certainly know that it has pierced, and you will not labor with it, since its cure was as we said.
However they said that the flesh is cured in some people and from the medicine by which one hopes for a benefit, it is, to apply a burning cautery finely according to the width of the fistula, just as was said before, and to introduce the ignited thing into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat that twice or three times until you know that all the added and filtered flesh which are similar to the reeds of a bird's feather have already been charred.
Then cure that with linen bandages wrapped in butter until the charred flesh comes out: then cure that with ointments generating flesh and consolidating it.
If it is therefore cured, it is good.
And if not, then it will never be cured with any other treatment.
And if the probe comes out and has not reached as far as your finger which is in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or sifac between it and the probe: and you see the fistula on the surface of the skin that follows, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you go cutting with the probe that is in the fistula until the incision reaches where the end of the probe comes out, and the probe will be freed and fall.
Then cleanse those filtered flesh parts which resemble the reeds of a bird's feather so that nothing remains from them.
If however blood overpowers you and dissolves between you and the operation so that it cuts out those meats: then the better thing is done, and more speedy assistance, to cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
Since a cauterization with fire brings together good conditions, the burning of those added flesh parts is added, and the drying up of blood and the drying out of humidity.
Then care for that with linens wrapped around it in butter, or crushed gallstones, until the place emits pus, and those burnt flesh parts will issue out into pus.
Then care for the wound with consolidating ointments, generating hard flesh: and there are medicines in which are coagulation and drying.
For when they are restored, then already it is healed: and you will not fear a relapse.
But if the fistula has already reached down to the depth of the anus, and is lengthened from excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus, and question with it.
So if you feel a thickness, and between it and you is a membrane of siphac or flesh, and it is near to penetration: then there is no operation on it, unless according to the way of trust and hope.
Which is, because it is administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize it itself, as we said: or to cut it out until you attain its concavity, so that it may be possible for you to insert a linen and cure from close by. And do not proceed much with the cutting, lest you cut the muscle surrounding the anus, and there occur an unpleasant exit of excretion without will. Then care for that in the manner which we mentioned.
Perhaps it will be healed: or you will lengthen that membrane, and cleanse it after having cut it near the anus, as we said, with a tent, or with another sharp-edged instrument. Then cleanse those filtered meats which are in the incision, until you can with inspection.
Then attempt the restoration of the entire wound with the incision and the upper opening where it is consolidated: and a fistula remains open on the inner part of the anus, and it will be easier over an infirm person.
And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus near the surface of the body with skin and edge of the anus: then take the perforated end of the probe, which is like an awl needle, that is, a suture material, according to this shape. And insert into it a thread wrapped from five threads, and around it. Then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until its concavity is reached.
If therefore it is penetrating into the edge of the anus on the inside nearby, then draw out the thread from that opening: thus inserting your finger into the anus and drawing out the end of the thread and gathering both ends together: and tighten both, and leave it for one or two days: and as much as the thread inclines in the flesh, tighten it well until the flesh between the two ends of the thread becomes incised and drops: then cure the wound until it consolidates and heals.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate however you prepare for yourself, unless it be very deep. For indeed it is not for you to do that because of the tendon, lest you cut it.
Then do with it as we said, until it heals.
The shape of the splint for a spiny fistula in which it is cut, whose curvature is very sharp and the other part is not sharp so that what is not necessary does not cut into it, as you see.
Chapter 81.
Concerning the stitching of hemorrhoids from which blood flows out through an incision into them: and the cure of their cracks.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. For either they are inside the anus, resembling carbuncles or blisters, or else like themselves are like clusters of grapes. And there are small and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and it is one, and they are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However those which are outside the anus are for the most part few in moisture, from which clear water or a little blood flows with steady course: and they are according to the color of the body.
And its cure which is inside the anus is, that you should command the patient to sit down and be pressed: and it should be squeezed until the anus comes out and they appear to you. Therefore also hang them with a hook: or hold them with your finger. Then cut into them at their roots.
But if the hooks do not hold in them because of their moisture and softening: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a strip from double woolen cloth, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut into them, and sprinkle over them after the cutting some hot powders to make a cauterizing. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then cure them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
But if the anus does not obey evacuation, then purge the patient with a purgative in which is a little bitterness, so that he may be cleansed with it what is in his rectum and quickly obey evacuation when he presses out.
But if the growths are external to the anus, then their treatment is easy and simple: and it is as if you take them with your finger, or take them with a hook, and cut into them. Then treat them with that which we said, until they are healed.
And he who despairs of a cut with iron, then it is necessary to sew them up in this manner. Take up the thread which has been wound and insert it into the needle. Then draw out the needle to the upper part and make it pierce with the needle into its root from the other side: and wind both ends of the thread around the lower part of the needle and be placed laterally: and draw tight the needle strongly. Then tie the thread and draw out the needle.
Do this with all of them and let one [suture] go loose: do not make it so that the surplus of blood runs from it.
Then place a cloth dipped in rose oil or ceruse on the anus and place it over the anus: and command the patient to rest. Then let him go until he falls.
Therefore when the sutures fall out, treat them with ointments and the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
¶ On the care of Fissures. For many times they happen from drying up of feces and constriction of nature.
So when they become old and medicine does not help in them: then it is necessary to scrape with the points of a sponge or with your own nail until they are moist and remove from them the top crust which prevents them from consolidating. Then treat them, until they consolidate as is necessary.
But if they do not consolidate: then repeat them with a sharper scraping than the first, until they are bloody and then scrape again treat them, until they are healed.
¶ On the cure of ulcers which turn inward, and not inward: and of dry sutures and of ants.
Chapter 82.
Know that Almirmar is nothing but a rounded knot according to the color of the body, similar to a key's handle: and it forms throughout the entire body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers: and pain occurs at walking.
Therefore it is necessary to cut out that which is in the surrounding area of the key's handle, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and be rooted out from its root.
Then cure that; and if you wish, cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
From the armpit however dry there is a small, rough, hardened, rounded elevation above the surface of the body. And many times it occurs on the hands of boys.
And its cure is to stretch out the armpit, and cut it: or bind it with a thread of silk: or with a thorn until it falls. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine: and now the armpits which were inverted are eradicated, and not those that I shall call by an instrument.
However a Formica is also a small, hardened, thick elevation above the surface of the body, running deep into it: and when cold weather finds it, one senses something similar to an ant's bite in it, and it occurs throughout the entire body: and most of all it occurs in the hands.
And its cure is to take a reed from the pen of a goose or a strong vulture: and place that reed over the Formica, until it holds the circle of the reed on its parts. Then turn your hand with the reed, until you cut out what is in the surrounding area of the Formica: and place it deep into the flesh, and root out the Formica from its root.
And if you wish, do that with a reed of air or iron, in this form.
The cannula should be stretched upwards as high as possible while drawing out the swelling, that it may be eased over the finger and its own reversal.
And if you wish to cauterize a scorpion according to what has been previously said in the chapter on cauterizing a burn.
Chapter 83.
On forms of instruments which are administered for cleansing of the intestines and solutions of the stomach and the bowels.
Sometimes a clister is made of silver or of tinned brass or melted bronze, or hammered iron.
And sometimes it is made from these instruments small and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore that which is administered for the care of small children should be small; and that which is given to those whose intestines are weak or painful should also be similar.
The large clister.
Its tube, that is the upper part in which the uterus is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction so that the uterus may be tied as you see it, and its lower extremity which is inserted into the anus, should be mute, that is not open, soft, very, drawing to subtlety: and on one side of it are two holes, and on the other side a single hole.
And the width of the hole should be according to the size of the stitches, a little larger or smaller, and it should be an uterus in which medicines are placed from animal bladder: or from ox parchment, which is shaped like a small dried sponge, whose root is one palm.
And it should be perforated with many holes as it revolves, and the space that is between every hole should be the width of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread from raw thread, which is of ten threads, or about that many, and tie it with the uterus like a sponge. When therefore the uterus is placed on it, a string should be tied around the head with a strong constriction between two distinct divisions by means of a clister. Then tie a ligature with him.
And this is the shape of the circle and the openings depicted here.
But the quality of tying a ligature with him is: that you fill the uterus or bladder with medicine which is warmed according to the tolerance of the sick person: and beware lest it be very hot or very cold.
Then the sick person is laid back on his back and lifts up his legs to the upper parts: and place under him an heapan, that is, a skin on which men lie, or a cloth.
Then anoint the extremity of the clister with oil, or with lamb's fat, or with fenugreek paste, or similar things. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then the servant should take hold of the uterus with both hands at once, and squeeze it out vigorously until all that is in the clister is evacuated into the intestine.
Then draw out the clister, and let the sick person lift up his legs to the wall.
But if the medicine causes him to evacuate, then he should hold on for as long as possible. And if he sleeps with it all through the night, it is a greater relief.
But if you tie him with the clister for diseases of the digestive tract and he hastens to evacuate it: then repeat the clistering until he is cured.
But if there are hemorrhoids or painful swellings in the anus: then let the clister be very fine and soft, like those used to tie up children.
And this should be the shape of a thin clister over which tight skin lies.
I don't see any text to translate. The notation "Caput LXXXIIII" appears to be a medieval heading, possibly from an index or table of contents. If you provide the actual text for Caput LXXXIIII, I'll be happy to assist with its translation into English.
I have said in the division concerning the cure of wounds what suited this book, and I will say here their cure with hand, and with medicines according to completeness.
I say therefore that wounds are divided according to the thing by which they are made, and according to the place on which the wound falls.
Therefore, the things by which wounds are made often are such as a stone thrown: or cutting with a sword, or a knife: or striking with a spear, or wood, or an arrow: and similar to those many things.
But the wounds that are made according to places of the body are such as a wound that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or side: and similar to those members.
And I am relating the cures of some wounds, so that I may place this reasoning and rule over the remaining wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the treatment of compound wounds will come at the end of the third chapter.
I say therefore. I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs in the head and there is no break of bone: then consider whether it was caused by a stone or something similar and already broke only the skin: and if the wound is large and you fear an evil outcome from a hot apostema: then hurry and apply immediately the cephalic phlebotomy: and do not delay it: and draw out from him blood according to the quantity of its virtue: if nothing prohibits bleeding, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is little. And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the patient beware for himself to avoid filling, and wine, and coarse foods.
If something prevents a cutting, then it will be lessened from food, and it will not approach meats nor wines.
And place over the wound if it happens to have a hot apostume, a poultice infused in rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is sharpness.
And if you are free from a hot aposteme, then place over the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and has not changed air, powder which I will tell later: and if already it has changed air, then place over it certain ointments, until it heals.
And if the wound is great or is from a cut of a sword, and similar things: and its lips do not come together by themselves, then gather it with a suture, according to what I will say about the wounds of the belly regarding their sutures.
And if the wound has already been exposed by a bone and hangs, and there is no holding of it except with a small bandage: then cut it. Then cure the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh to it in place of skin, and command the sick person to nourish himself with foods in which there is thickness, such as heads and cooked barley until he be like a pulse: and things similar.
But if you find a putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut out the whole putrefaction and throw it away: afterwards cure that.
And if there is an artery or a vein from which blood flows in these wounds and it cannot be cut off by remedies, then search above the artery. So if you find it not to be cut with a razor, then cut it with cauterization or bind it. And if necessity prompts and does not provide what we said, then cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
If however these wounds are small, simple, then the treatment of them is easy, light: thus powder them with this powder, for it solidifies them before air alters them.
The method of powdered flesh. Recipe one part of olibanum, and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished ashes: it should be ground well and sifted through a sieve. The wound should be filled with this and constricted tightly until it adheres well on top and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it tightly from above with bandages, and let it alone, nor loosen it until it remains in that way so that it does not become inflamed. For the medicine is not removed from it until it heals.
And sometimes it makes the same thing from ashes alone when you do not have olibanum and dragon's blood. And this also performs the same operation in many great wounds when it is placed on them and bound up, and they are fresh wounds with their own blood which air has not altered.
But if air has altered them in some way, especially when it is in the time of summer, then this powder is not in position for that: so treat it therefore with what we said, and place on it some digested ointment: or place on it cakes made from barley flour, made with water and honey, until they discharge pus. Then cure the rest of them with the remaining treatment, until they are healed.
But if a fracture happens with the wound in bones and it is small, then extract that thing with Galena. And I will now say the treatment of fractures of the head, as for what will be later.
On wounds of the neck.
But if a wound occurs on the neck then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
If however the nerve of the neck has already been incised, or the artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no treatment for it except that its care be abandoned with it just as it causes intense numbness, such as tinidrosis, and zegi, and similar things. Because the nerves injure them and contract them.
And do not place anything cold whatever on the wound: because the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is a more elevated part of the limbs: and that with which it is treated should be gentle medicines such as slaked lime mixed sometimes with clear water and oil or rose oil, and tuthia when washed even with clear water: and the rest of the mineral stones in this manner, and humid unguents.
If however the wound is large, then administer a suture or bind its edges with lint. Then care for it until it heals.
If the wound has depth or occurs in a cavity on its lower part where pus has already accumulated, then puncture it in a more depressed place.
Which if it has already been incised in the wound and blood flow from it has followed: then separate or cut it, and bind it itself: or cautery it, if necessity prompts to that.
If however the vertebra of the throat has already been incised, or all of it, and other things have been saved: then bring together the edges of the skin with a suture over the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat, indeed leave it alone, and return it to its natural shape. Then bind it tightly with a suitable bandage, and let it go for several days. Then care for it with ointments in which is numbness and dryness, until it heals.
If however the wound has already made an impression in the bone, then probe it: then if there are fragments of bone within it, extract all of them or as many as you can, and that which is not prepared, leave it until the wound becomes foul, separates, and its discharge eases.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder which I have mentioned. But if a bone seems to be in the wound and an abscess forms: then treat it with that whose description comes in its own chapter.
On a cut on the soles.
If it is a blow from a lance or knife and you see its depth, then consider [the treatment]. So if from the wound there issues a swelling and when the sick person breathes with difficulty from it, then know that the wound is mortal.
But if it is not deep and is fresh with its own blood, then do not put powder on it from the first hour nor bind it so that the blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and kill the sick person: but put a drawing ointment on it and dissolve it twice a day.
But if the ointment is not present to you, then put old cotton in the wound's opening so that it sucks up what comes out of it from moistures: and have the sick person sleep over the wound, so that what gathers in it heals.
But if already three days or more have passed over the wound and there has not befallen the sick person a spasms nor bad trembling of the heart nor constriction in breathing, and you see its remaining conditions good: then know that the wound is sound. So therefore cure it with liniments and the rest of the treatment until it heals.
But if its healing is delayed and it always opens up, then know that an abscess has already been formed. So therefore cure it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut with a knife or sword and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then cure it with that which preceded for suture, if it is great: or with powder, if it is small.
If, however, he has already made an imprint on the bone and it is splintered off from it; then examine the wound, and hasten to extract those splinters if they are separated. If, however, they are not separated, then leave them alone, until the wound puttrefies; for extraction of them is eased.
But as for other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, the judgment in their cure is the same as that which we said.
Concerning wounds of the belly, and the outlet of the intestine, and the outlets thereof.
A rupture which occurs in the belly is great, medium, and small.
From a great rupture, therefore, sometimes an intestine or the number of intestines are protruding.
Why there is intrusion of them, and their stitching more violent and more difficult.
And a small rupture also becomes difficult from another mode. Therefore it follows that their reduction is more difficult, if you do not hasten to their intrusion into its place at once, because it swells, opens up, and becomes enlarged: why their entrance becomes difficult.
On account of this therefore the middle rupture is a better kind of rupture: because with it the reduction of the intestine does not become difficult, as becomes difficult in these two kinds.
Know that the stitching of the belly is according to four modes.
Two common stitches are suitable for the stitching of the belly, and also for the stitching of other wounds of the body; and two other stitches properly communicate with the other wounds. However they are more proper for the stitching of the belly: and I will tell you each one with an explanation and a declaration.
I say therefore, that when the wound is small and something protrudes from it out of the intestine, and it becomes difficult to reduce it; then that is due to one of two modes. Or because of the fragility of the tear, as we have said: Or since there is inflation within the intestine due to the coldness of air.
When therefore it is so, then you should heat the thing itself, just as you would soak a sponge or a damp cloth in lukewarm water. Or you should boil the sap of the squill, and the root of the cypress, and the spike of the asafoetida, and apply them to the intestine with it until the inflation is resolved.
And sometimes he makes that wine in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of inflammation.
And when you see the inflation already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which aloes or mallow have been cooked. For by that it is eased into him and a small thing is allowed to enter.
But if there is failure of return after this cure, then search for a little disruption with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first cure is better when prepared than a cutting, and there is no need to be forced to cut afterwards because of necessity and deficiency of the instrument.
Let one part of it be twisted, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the extremity subtle is not with subtlety so fine as to be like a Scampi, but rather slightly obtuse, and that which resembles a hook, just as you see.
And when the wound is therefore enlarged and enters the intestine, then it should be reduced back according to its natural form to its proper place for itself, if possible over it, since that is better.
And when the disruption is wide in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary to have the sick person lie on his back and place their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the stomach, then place your intention and your thought always on this, that the part where the wound is should be the higher part of the other.
And so it should be, that you take care of it in great wounds, and in middle-sized wounds.
But in small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you.
Then have a pious attendant present between your hands, who holds the disruption with his hand and closes his lips. Then pull out from it a thread to one who follows to sew, bit by bit: and this is the common method of sewing in one.
And you should take needles, or a number of needles according to the size of the width of the wound. Then release from the end of the disruption a length of a finger's breadth, that is, of a doctor: and fix one needle on one side so that you insert thread into it in two ends of skin, with two ends of sifac as if what is under skin from the inside, until you make it pass through the other part, and you have already brought together two ends of skin, and two ends of sifac: and four orders are made.
Then tie with double thread around the circumference of the needle several times from both parts at once, until the two lips of the wound are properly brought together.
Then release the thickness of a finger and fix another needle into them: afterwards draw it back with thread, just as you did with the first needle. Therefore do not cease to do that with him from whom you need needles until you complete the closure of the wound altogether.
And let the needles be of medium size between thickness and fineness: because very fine needles quickly pierce the flesh: and coarse ones are difficult to enter into the skin: on account of this it is necessary that they be of medium size in fineness and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted into the two extreme parts of the skin near together much: so that the flesh does not cut quickly, and the wound is opened before its own consolidation, and the edges are not lengthened even with suturing, lest the wound be prevented from consolidating.
Then cut off the tip of the needle, lest it hurt the patient in his sleep: and place cloths around them on all sides that hold the ends of the needles: and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And indeed this type of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds. Because one or two needles suffice for their stitches, or roughly that many.
However the second stitch is common, that gathers with the stitch four edges: two of skin, and two edges of silk in place one with another, with a needle where there is thread wrapped around it equal in fineness and thickness.
Then when you have pierced with the needle these four edges, draw back the needle from the part where you started it again, so that the thread which is left above will fall, that it may be a stitch, like the stitching of cloth by which cloths are sewn together: and place between all the stitches the quantity of thickness of a small finger.
Men know this stitch.
And with this stitch I closed the wound which happened to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a greater disruption of the wound than the breadth of one hand: and he had come out from the intestines about two hands from the middle intestine, and there was a disruption in the middle of the abdomen.
Therefore I returned it after his intestine had stood outside the wound for 24 hours.
Therefore the wound was consolidated in a space of about 15 days: and I cured it, and he was healed: and he lived after that for many years, living in his usual ways.
And the physicians had judged that it would not be healed.
And by a miracle it was, that I did not heal it with ointment. Because I was in a place where the ointment was not found, nor anything else from medicines. So I placed therefore on the wound a worn-out linen cloth twice a day, and I made frequent washing of it with honeyed water, until it was healed.
But two indeed kinds of suturing proper I will say according to the narrative of speech.
And it is, that you begin with acute suture: and you insert the needle from the outer to the inner part.
When therefore the needle pierces the skin and into the muscle running according to length and breadth of the entire body: let go the end thereof which is in the side wherein you inserted the needle, and cause it to penetrate into the other end from the inner part to the outer in the other side.
When therefore you have made it to penetrate, then make it to penetrate thus in the very same end mirach from the outer part to the inner: and let go the end thereof which is in this side, and cause the needle to penetrate into the other end from the inner part to the outer: and cause it to penetrate with your penetration as you make it to penetrate into the end mirach which is in its part, until it penetrates into itself entirely.
Then begin also from this very same side, and sew it to itself with the end which is from the sifac in the other side, and draw out the needle from the skin wherein it pierced.
Then return it to that skin and sew the end of the sifac which is in the other side with this end mirach; and draw out it from the skin which is of its part, and make this thing vice versa, and another: and make this thing vice after vice, until you have sewn all its exterior according to that example.
The sum of this suture is to bind the sutures together like those used for skinning hides. So that you stitch them in one place with one end of the skin and then let it go again on the other side until you have completed.
The second kind of proper suture which Galemus spoke of.
This is his word said that you should do it in a way similar to what certain physicians do. They gather all parts together so they match each other by nature: and apply the end of one suture to the end of another, and the end of one thread to the end of another. And that is done according to what I am telling you.
You should fix the needle so that it is in the end of one thread close to you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part alone in it. And let go the two ends of the thread. Then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner part in the two ends of the thread, that is on both sides.
Then turn the two [threads] around again and also make them penetrate from the inner to the outer part, in the other two ends of the suture which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is a better and easier common suture, and it is the suture which was previously mentioned.
This then is also the word of Galen as well.
And some have said. The suture of the belly is corrected with two needles. That is, to insert one thread into both and start with the insertion of the needle from what is at your hand, and make it penetrate as far as to the other side, according to the suture of those who sew skins equally.
And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the belly: then its suture is more difficult than other places of the belly.
The judgment of a wound's treatment is the judgment of other wounds.
For this is because when you treat a fresh wound with its own blood, before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine, and restore it to itself, and bandage it properly: then lay it on powdered flesh.
But if the air has already altered the wound, then lay on it some ointments which are present to you, until they make a discharge and threads fall and become healthy and sound. Then cure it as is the care of other wounds, until it heals.
But if medicines are not present to you, then lay on it immediately an old linen cloth where a discharge begins to come from, and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need another medicine for most dispositions, when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound will communicate to the principal parts with an inflammation, then it is necessary that you soak a soft cloth in tempered warm oil or rose oil, and put it on the areas between the thighs and under the armpits.
But if it feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction within its own intestines (for this often happens) then cleanse it with a warm, black, bitter wine enema: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and become an open perforation to its depth.
And know that the wound from the thick intestine is easier to heal and the one from the thin intestine is harder to heal.
The intestine however that is called the Jejunum, does not accept healing from a wound which happens in it altogether: and this is because of its multitude, which is formed from veins, and the magnitude of them, and because of the thinness of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If however that which proceeds from the wound is pus, and you follow it up recently: reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce entrails equally.
But if it has passed the time and has already become green or black: then you must tie it up with thread above the place that was discolored from it, so that there may not be a flow of blood. For in pus are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside of it: so that there may be a relief to you from its attraction, and extraction of itself in case of pus formation or discharge from the wound.
A reminder of the wound which occurs in the intestine.
When there occurs a disruption in the intestine and it is small: then it is possible that it may be restored in some people: therefore, because I have seen someone who was wounded in his belly with a spear thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old; and a fistula had formed, and there came out from it an evacuation, and inflammation.
I therefore applied a treatment, until I was not confident in his healing: nor did I cease to remove it, until he was healed, and the place consolidated.
After I saw the place now consolidated, I feared for the sick person, that an accidental evil would happen to him in his belly: and it did not happen to him from that accidental evil. And he remained in better physical dispositions, eating and drinking, copulating, and entered the bath, and was exercised in his usual habits.
And some of the experimenters have said, that when there occurs a wound in the intestine and it is small: then it is necessary to tie it according to this manner. And take the large-headed ants. Then gather two of the edges of the wound and place one ant with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound. When therefore it bites and closes its jaws, cut off its head, for it adheres and does not come loose.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease to repeat this with an ant after each other according to the size of the wound as a whole.
Then pull it back and sew up the wound. For its heads indeed remain attached to the intestines until they are eaten and the wound heals, and no harm will befall the patient entirely.
And now it is possible to sew the intestine with a thin thread, which I have tried and tested by attaching it to an animal's intestine after introducing it into the needle.
And take the end of this thread from the intestine and it will be very thick. Then bind a thin linen thread wound around its end. Then insert that thread into the needle and sew with it the intestine. Then pull it back to its place.
And this method of stitching with ants and intestine is nothing but through the way of faith and hope.
Know that a wound which is great and wide, especially if it is on one of the slender intestines, then there is no skill except for the gentle sewing, nor its cure at all.
Concerning the care of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that every wound or abscess which becomes old and turns to an ulcer, does not consolidate, and constantly discharges pus, and is not healed: then it is universally called a fistula, wherever it may be in the body, and we call it a Zucheum.
And indeed fistula is a true node that is filtered, hard, white; with which there is no pain, whose concavity resembles the feather of a bird: and because of this some call it risatis, i.e., a feather.
And it is in certain hours wet, which emits pus. And perhaps the moisture is broken up in certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is abundant and scant; and thick and thin.
And I have already warned in division, when I spoke of wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, nor flesh grows in it, is not that except for one of nine causes.
One of which is, or because of the small amount of blood in the body: or because of its badness: or because there is hard flesh between it and its edges, preventing the growth of flesh: or because it is very dirty and foul-smelling: or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter sent to it has bad quality: or because medicine is not suitable for its cure: or because a corruption falling in the region is a kind of plague, or by nature in the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: in which there is difficulty in digesting sicknesses and healing boils is delayed by nature: or because there is one bone or a number of bones in it.
And I have already shown all those causes and signs of them, and their cures with medicines in division; and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of fistula and zuken, which occurs by way of operation with the hand.
Therefore know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body. For some fistulas reach the large veins and arteries, or nerves, or bladder; or the intestines, or the urinary tract, or to some of the ribs; or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some joints: such as hands and feet. And from these there are those that go towards the proximity of the main limb, and similar ones.
What therefore is next to these fistulas in terms of difficulty of healing, is one that does not accept treatment and its management is labor and ignorance.
But if it is from a fistula whose depth does not reach the places I mentioned: and you hope and trust in its cure, and wish to come to an understanding of it, then take a probe made from air or iron, if the fistula runs straight up and down, and seek out the bottom with it.
But if there is a twisting in the fistula, then probe it with a thin lead probe. Because lead, with its soft body, is alleviated and curved around the twisting.
And if the fistula has many openings, it will be impossible for you to find your way over it with a probe. Therefore cleanse one of its openings from among its openings.
For the moisture with which you clean it flows towards other openings and runs out through them.
Then carefully investigate by which means it is possible for you to know that there is an opening or a nerve, and whether the fistula's concavity is far away or near; or if it is one fistula with many openings, and stand over the whole of it with your greatest strength: with your questioning of the patient, and discovery of pain at compression with your hand on the place, and similar signs and causes of accidents that happen in an abscess.
So when you have stood over all those places truly, then go to the cure according to your confidence. And it is, as you consider then, if there is a fistula appearing near or in a safe place far from the joint, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I told you: then cut the fistula according to what has been previously said in my narration, and remove what is in it by filtration, and corrupted flesh that is born in its opening from the flesh or skin, and similar things: and heal it until it is cured.
If however a fistula is of great depth and along the straightness: then it is necessary that you cut it as deep as possible. Then cleanse it from all corrupted flesh around it.
Then administer a linen strip wrapped in sharp medicines; and insert it into the hollow of the fistula as far as you can reach with iron; do this several times until the sharp medicine eats away all that remains in the hollow of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If it does not heal by that, then cauterize it as we have described.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you are certain about it: then investigate it, and cut it out as I told you to; if nothing from the vein, or nerve, or main member hinders you, as we said.
If therefore a bone is revealed to you and there is something of corruption and blackness in it: then rasp it away until the corruption of it is entirely removed. Then care for it with that which fleshes it out, until it heals.
But if it does not heal and discharges pus as it was doing: then you will know that you did not reach the complete eradication of the corruption.
Therefore scrape again over it and make a careful examination of its cavity and cleansing of it with all your might.
Then restore it. But if it heals, good; and if not, then you will know that the corruption is in a distant depth of the body which you did not reach. So there is no ingenuity for you with it, except to leave it to nature.
But if the corrupted bone is small and you are able, draw it out with fine pincers that suit it.
If however there are many bones, then make an exact union of them all, and do not leave anything out with your strength.
If however something makes you oppose it from the moistures, and there is no fear or error in their incision: then cut those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If however you do not have preparation for removing the bones from your wound, then place something over it that will make it rot itself: and leave it alone, until what is around those bones from flesh and moistures has rotted.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal. And tighten the incision which you made in your operation. Indeed place over it, if you fear, a cloth immersed in crushed sulfur mixed with oil: or a cloth immersed in Egyptian ointment, or some green unguents.
For when those moistures rot, namely they will separate from them bones, the removal of them and their union is eased.
If however there is one large bone, such as the leg bone or hip bone, and similar to those, and what has become corrupted from it is a major part: then shave it with a final scraping, until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If however what has become corrupted in it is a major part, and corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw it and cut it all the way down to where the corruption has come: then care for it until it heals.
And I tell you Zukan, what happened to a man in his leg: that you may set the example and aid over your own operation.
There was a young man about thirty years old, to whom happened pain in his leg, from cause which moved against him within the body, that is, from inside, until it came to the thigh and formed a great apostema: and there was no external cause.
Therefore it was extended with him at that time with the error of physicians, until an abscess was opened up, and many materials occurred with him. And after that his care was abandoned until the leg had become a fistula and many openings were made in it: which all emitted pus and bodily humors.
Therefore a multitude of physicians treated him for about two years and there was no one skilled in the art of surgery among them until I was called and I saw his leg and the materials that were flowing from those openings in great quantity: even his entire body had grown foul and its color was yellow.
Therefore I inserted my probe into one of the openings, and it reached to the bone.
Then I examined all the openings, and I found that they were all communicating with one another from every part of the leg.
I therefore proceeded and cut over one of those openings until I exposed a part of the bone: and I found it to be corrupted: which was already eaten away, and denatured, and had become putrid, and perforated, until it had penetrated all the way to the marrow.
I therefore cut out what was found in me, and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I left what would not be in the bone except that corruption which I cut out and removed. And I had already eradicated it.
Then I placed the wound's restoration with consolidating medicines over a long period. And it has not consolidated.
Then I tried again and cut into the bone a second time above the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone: and I removed what appeared to me from that very corruption.
Then I attempted to restore it. And it was not restored.
I therefore cut into it again and did not stop cutting away the bone little by little, and attempting to restore it: and it was not restored, until I cut out from the bone about a hand's width, and extracted that with its marrow.
Then I restored him with medicines, and he was quickly consolidated and healed. And this repetition of the operation on him and his section was not necessary, except because of the weakness of the sick man's condition, and the scarcity of his tolerance, and my fear for him from death: since harm befell him at every hour from excessive evacuation of bad humors.
He was therefore completely healed by the healing: and there was formed in place of the bone hard flesh, and a good disposition was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he became converted to his former dispositions: and no harm or injury at all occurred to him on walking.
But if the prominent bone in place of the body is already broken: then it is necessary that you set it, according to this manner: and thus: take a cord, and bind it at the end of the projecting bone: and order someone to stretch it upwards: and put another cord from thicker wool on top of the first cord. Then bind it on top of the flesh which is under the bone: and stretch out its extremity so that you pull the flesh downwards: and you must uncover the flesh over the place which you wish to saw, so that it does not injure the saw.
Place a wooden board or a plate under the lower bone properly: because when you do this, it is not prevented that the corrupted flesh will be cut.
And it is necessary that the sawing be a little over the place of corruption, so that there may not be concavity of the corrupted bone: and may not appear in its sensation, and may cause another to come in place of the sawing.
But if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, indeed its part continues with another part: and corruption is in the middle of it or in one of its parts: then uncover all the flesh from around it completely. Then place a wooden board underneath.
Then saw it from the first part where there is corruption, until the sawing continues from the other part: and let the sawing be according to length slightly beyond the corruption, as we have said.
If there is corruption in a joint, cut out the corrupted joint itself, and saw off the bone where it continues on the other side.
If indeed corruption is in the joining of two joints, then there is no remedy for it except abrasion.
But if corruption is in the pelvis of the hand, or in the pelvis of the foot: then the case in that part is very difficult. However, you must inquire about the corruption and see how it appears to you. And you should scrape it clean and cleanse the area according to what is possible for you, and with whatever device you correct it when it does not cause contradiction in a vein or nerve.
And you should know that scalpels and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the location of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and subtlety, and size, and smallness, and hardness, and rarity. Therefore it is necessary that you prepare all sorts of surgical instruments fitting for the surgery.
And know that these operations are meant to tell you about the kind of instrument you need, when you have a long study with it. And knowledge of the ways of this art is a witness to the ways of diseases; then indeed you will already find through yourself what suits it from instruments for every weakness.
And I am establishing for you at the end of this chapter a number of instruments that you will put examples on which you will cut, and a proof by which you will try others.
The shape of another saw.
The form of a razor for joining things together. Let the head of this razor be in the shape of the head of a star-shaped needle, and its points to be in the shape of the points of a slitting needle.
And it is not suitable unless its heads are rubbed with them when the joining parts corrupt or a large and great bone.
The form of the greater razor.
The form of the wide razor.
The form of a curved razor.
The form of another fine razor.
The form of the other curved-end razor.
The form of a small, fine and pointed razor.
It resembles a reamer and its end is like a saw: it is shown in many places for the reason of bones.
The form of the razor which suits the piercing of bones.
Its end is triangular with sharp points.
It is made from steel. And similarly all the things that we have said should be made from razors and knives and saws.
About the cutting off of extremities and the removal of bones.
The extremities putrefy either from an external or internal cause.
When then you have been medicated for that corruption and the cure does not take effect: and you see corruption occurring in a member which is not relieved by anything: then it is necessary to cut off that member as far as the corruption goes, so that the sick person may escape death or greater harm from the defect of the member.
And the sign that it has happened is that the member becomes black until it rots: which when fire burns it or after blackening putsrefies: until the decay is cut out as far as follows that member and spreads throughout the body.
Therefore with its wound and similarly if the cause of corruption is from the sting of some venomous things: as of the sea scorpion, and viper, and rattlesnake, and similar ones.
Therefore if the corruption or sting is in the extremity of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not allow the corruption to spread so that it may ascend to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the arm, then cut it off from the elbow and do not allow the corruption to spread until it reaches into the forearm.
And if it invades that one, then cut off the arm at the elbow at its joint.
But if however corruption passes through and you see him around the elbow: then in that one is the death of the sick person. And to administer anything beyond that from cure is quantity of power.
And similarly do this for the foot, when corruption invades the finger, then cut off the same at one of the joints: and if it reaches into the heel of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. But if it ascends to the knee, then cut off the leg at the joint of the knee.
But if corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no art in it except for cutting off and leaving the sick person to death.
And the method of cutting off a member or sawing it is, to tie the sinew below at the place you wish to cut: and tie another sinew above the place. And let the attendant stretch one sinew towards the lower part: and let the attendant stretch another sinew upwards to the top. And you separate the flesh that is between the two sinews, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh is exposed. Then it is to be cut or sawed.
And it is necessary that you place a linen cloth over all the parts and the saw should not touch the healthy place: and an added injury occurs to the sick person and a hot abscess.
If, however, a bleeding of blood should occur internally while you are operating, then burn the place quickly; or put over it some powdered substances cutting off the blood. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and take care of it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to a man on his foot, the same thing that I am telling you.
Which is that a blackness occurred on his foot, with a burning like a fire's combustion; and the corruption first occurred in his finger, until it began to spread throughout his foot.
Therefore the man drew out from himself, after he saw the corruption fall on his member with its inflammation, which he found because of pain and burning of it: and it fell at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed over him, that same corruption occurred to him in the finger of his hand on his index.
So he came to me, and I tried to recover that excess with him on the hand after putting medicines over his body: and the excess was not stayed, and it began to go into another finger; until corruption occurred in his hand.
So he called on me to cut off his hand: and I did not want it, hoping from me on the recovery of that excess: and I also feared death for him at the cutting of his hand. Because the man's virtue was over taking a risk.
Therefore after he had despaired of me, he returned to his land: and it came to me about him, because he hastened, and cut off his hand entirely: and he was healed.
And I did not tell this story, unless it was to be an aid in regard to that which falls into the kind of this sickness: and so that there would be indication by means of which it should be indicated, and according to which it should be done.
On the treatment of sinuses and the quality of the cleansing with medicines.
When an apostema occurs in certain fleshy parts and the space of the apostema is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus: then it bursts or becomes perforated, and what is inside comes out with the pus, and the place remains empty like a pouch: and the skin that covers it is like a cloth that has been worn thin: and it does not reach its ultimate point in corruption, nor presses into the bone, nor into the nerve, nor into the ligament: it deserves to be called a sinus: but if its space is prolonged until it imprints corruption on something of these parts, then it is called a fistula or abscess.
And its treatment is to cut the entire skin over it as it peels off: and especially when it has been worn thin and become like a cloth: and you trust that it will not adhere with the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and the corruption does not reach its ultimate outcome: and if there is a thickening of skin on it from flesh: then treat it with a poultice: and it is as if you are considering a sinus.
Then if it is large and the pus that comes out of it has a foul odor: then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine, which is made from equal parts of vinegar, oil, and zinar (or gum arabic): they are mixed together in a vessel: and heated over fire until the medicine becomes red: and thickens like honey.
Then take as much of it as you need and dissolve it with water and honey: and cleanse the sinus with it: and bind shut its opening, and leave the medicine inside for the space of two hours.
Then draw it out with a gentle squeezing: do this daily until the sinus is cleaned and the foul odor is removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with a cinder water, when this medicine is not present to you: and thus, take the ashes of vine wood or ashes from ilex trees; and pour water over them. Then anoint it with oil and cleanse her with it until you trust that the sinus has been washed clean.
But if the sick person is not able to tolerate Egyptian medicine nor cinder water, then cleanse him with water and honey in which something from ground gallnut has been mixed. Or cleanse him with honey and wine mixed together, since the nature of honey is to purify and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere especially when there is excess dryness and astringency in it.
When you have done this several times and trust that the corruption of the sinus has been removed: then cleanse him with what makes flesh grow there.
And it is, to take from the diaphrenic ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine: or cleanse him with some medicines and other ointments, whose properties I wrote down in the treatise on ointments.
But if the opening of the sinus is narrow, into which the cannula of the cleanser will not enter: then widen it with iron for a little while: or place a linen folded in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, within it until it is widened.
And similarly if the opening is also large, then join its lips with a suture and let it be empty of as much quantity as the cleanser will enter without adding anything.
And similarly if the opening from which pus flows is raised upwards: then cut it at a lower place that is within it, so that the pus will flow out of it downwards: because when pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from growing there.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around below it according to your will: then try, as you prepare the member with a preparation by which it runs from it pus easily according to how it is prepared for you. Try, that nothing of the pus is retained in it altogether: and take consolidating medicines which are put on a sign, fitting for what you wish. And stretch them out over linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such a size as to make communication of the whole sinus. Then cut with scissors into the direct opening of the sinus' hole, enlarging the opening of the sinus a little. Then stretch out a cloth dipped in gentle ointment over another cloth, according to the size of the hole; and place it on top with a position far from the opening of the sinus, so that it eases the exit of pus from it: and you will not remove the large cloth unless after some days once.
But that one which is over the opening of the sinus, you remove every hour, so that what gathers in it from pus may go out; and so you will know whether what runs out from it is much or little, or digested or undigested.
And when you have done this again, examine the place of the sinus itself, if its owner feels pain in it, or if there is no pain in it; and if there is an aposteme in it, or if there is not an aposteme in it.
When therefore your medication is thus prolonged, and you see the matter which comes out over the opening of the sinus, then you will know that the sinus already adheres, or approaches adhesion: then therefore dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you have dissolved the wound, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
But if after a long space there comes out from the sinus a thin and subtle pus, then do not lose hope of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, because among men are those who retard the formation of flesh in their own wounds, and also those who act against it.
If however unclean discharge issues from a sinew after many days, then you should know that the sinew is not adhering.
If therefore the sinew is delayed in adhering and its treatment is prolonged, then add to the drying remedies that true physicians do, so that they be moist in substance and dry in virtue: as balm of Vaseline when excess of the added ingredient from gall is removed.
And from the final most serious treatment, is that you take balm of Vaseline, and dissolve it with rose oil, and pour it over equal wine in substance.
Then apply it to him, and use it for him.
And now do the same with this action, when you do not have balm of Vaseline present, honey, when it is cooked and thickened, use it. Or take myrrh, and aloe, and galbanum; rub all together, and sprinkle that over honey when it is still on the fire. Then tie it over it with a cloth, and bind it over the sinew; then tie with honey which you cooked until thickened: and sprinkle over it spices, and place on top a cloth, and bind him.
And sometimes it is administered to that Aristolochia longa, and roots of lily of heaven, and the lily itself, and wheat of the herb, and Centaury. Use them simple or compound, rub them together, and sift it; and sprinkle over the honey that I have spoken of, and use it with it.
But if the treatment of the sinew is prolonged and does not heal with this cure: then know that there is corruption deep within it; or already it makes an impression in the bones, or in the other hard parts, or in the ligaments: then treat it with the cure of Abscesses, as was previously said.
About the care of paralysis and worn nails, and the cutting of an added digit, and division.
Paralysis is a boil which arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or foot, and perhaps it also arises on other fingers.
Therefore when it prolongs and is neglected in its care, and boils up with a warm boil, or becomes corrupted and lets out pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail, and perhaps corrupts it all the way through to the bone, so that there is a foul odor: and the end of the finger becomes swollen, and its color becomes dull.
Therefore when you are treating it, as we said in the division, and your treatment is not effective: then you must cut out with iron all the superfluity that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For a cauterization is very helpful.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is also healthy, and the additions of the nail are now compressing the flesh to the inside, and begin to pierce it, and hurt it: then you must put a thin rod under the angle of the nail which pierces the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut out the flesh with ease, and put over what remains of the flesh medicines that burn and corrode, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments, until it heals.
But if the corruption has already sunk into the bone, then you must cut it out and remove it: for it will never heal while the corrupted bone remains.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading into the finger, then cut it off at a joint, according to what has been said before about its amputation. Then treat it, until it heals.
If, however, a nail has been driven into or struck an artery: and there occurs in it a severe pain, then the patient must first be bled. Then cut off the nail with a sharp steel saw from top to bottom.
And be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh which is under the nail, for through it a severe pain will occur on the patient and there will be a cause for the birth of new flesh in place.
Then cure the place with what soothes pains.
However, the finger which grows on some people's hands, is perhaps entirely fleshy and perhaps in some of them there are bones and perhaps a nail, and sometimes it grows from the root joint or its birth is in some of the finger's nodes. Therefore, that which grows in some of the finger's nodes does not move and that which grows at the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
So, therefore, that one which is fleshy is easily cut off. Which is to cut it at its root with a wide-bladed steel.
But the cure of that one whose birth is in the joint of the knuckle is difficult. Therefore refrain from cutting it.
But truly he who grows on the finger at the last joints, then it is necessary to cut into his flesh first with a rounded cut up to the bone. Then saw through the bone with one of those saws fitting for it. Then cure him until he heals.
But the joining together of fingers which often occurs together, happens sometimes from the birth of man, that is, it grows with him, or from the healing of a wound, or by burning of fire, and similar things.
Therefore it is necessary to cut off that joining until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place between them a ligature, or linen cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not heal quickly, and separate between them; or place between them a thin sheet of lead, until the place consolidates as it should.
And similarly if there is a consolidation of some fingers with the palm, then cut that consolidation, according to how it is prepared and fits the shape of the member.
About cutting a wound.
Ulcers are veins that are wrapped around, thick, and full of melancholic superfluities which occur in many parts of the body: and most often they occur in legs, especially in the legs of travelers and workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Therefore you must administer a purging of the body from black bile several times with strong cleansing.
Then apply bloodletting to the patient's Basilica vein.
The treatment of them with iron is according to two modes. One of them is, that they are cut, and the black blood is drawn out. And the other mode is, that the vein be lifted up, and the whole thing drawn out.
The cutting of it is according to this method. Wrap the leg first with hot water very much, until the thick and feculent blood dissolves. Then bind the weak leg of the patient from the upper part of his hip to the lower part of his knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three wide incisions.
Then raise it, that is, draw out the blood from the lower part of the leg up to the top, and first let the physician take out the blood from the upper part. Then cut the nail down to the bottom until the quantity of blood that you see is sufficient and as much as the weakness of the patient can tolerate.
Then bind her up. And order him to abstain from foods producing black bile. And let blood and repeat evacuation and venesection when the veins are filled, and it harms the sick one.
Its evacuation however is in this manner. Shave the legs of the sick person if there are many hairs on them. Then insert him into the bath or pour hot water on his leg until it reddens and the veins are swollen: or exercise him with strong exercise if there is no bath present, until the member is warmed.
Then cut the skin in a straight line along the direction of vein sectioning or at its last part near the knee, or at its lower part near the heel.
Then open the cut with a hook and strip the vein from all sides until it appears to the sense: and at its appearance you see it reddening towards blackness. When therefore it goes out of the skin, you see it white as if it were a cord.
Then insert under it some linen until when it is raised and goes out of the skin: suspend it with a blind hook gently.
Then cut another section nearby, three fingers from that first cut. Then strip the skin away from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then raise it with linens as you did, and suspend it with another hook as you first did.
Then cut another section, or more sections if necessary for that. Then raise and incise the very last section at the heel.
Then draw it out to the section which is above it.
And do that until you draw it out from the upper section or all higher sections, until when it goes out entirely; then cut it.
But if it does not obey you to be drawn out and raised: then insert a hook with a strong string doublefold, and bind it, and draw it out; or insert under it some linen: and turn your hand over in all ways until it comes out. And beware, lest it be cut. For if it is cut, it becomes difficult for you to lift it up greatly, and a hurtful trouble enters into the sick person from it.
So when you have drawn it out entirely, then place over the place of wounds a cloth dipped in wine and rose oil, or in oil, and take care of him until he be healed.
But if the vein is contracted, having a twist to which its turning is towards the parts, and it is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary that you cut on top of it for all part of its twist, and places of its turning.
Then suspend it with hooks, until you lift it out entirely: and beware near your cut on top of it lest you cut the vein, or wound it: for it will be difficult for you to lift it, or draw it out. Therefore preserve your prudence.
The Form of Cutting by which the Vein is healed.
The Form of a Blind Hook.
It does not have the curvature as with the other hooks, nor is it sharp at the end, so that it may not wound the vein: and it has a thick, gentle bending, because if it were slender, it would cut the vein by its slenderness: nay, let its thickness be superfluous, as we said.
On the drawing out of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the thighs on hot lands, such as Egypt and the land of the Arabs, and on dry hot lands, a few in softness, that is, in which grass nor tree does not grow.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its generation indeed is from the putrefaction that occurs under the skin, just as it happens in the bodies of snakes and ascarid worms, and the worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein's outcome is, that an inflammation occurs mildly in the leg. Then the area becomes watery. Then the vein begins to protrude from that place of swelling, as if it were a root of a plant or an animal.
So when its extremity appears from it, then it is necessary to wrap around it a piece of lead whose weight is one and a half drachms, up to two drachms, and tie the thread on it: and let the lead hang from the leg.
Whenever therefore something protrudes from it to the exterior, wrap that up in lead and tie it. But if it is prolonged much, then cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder. And do not cut it from its roots until it has protruded completely. For if you cut it, it contracts and enters into the flesh: and causes an abscess to occur, and a foul decay in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary that it be treated gently, and extracted gradually, until it protrudes completely from its last part, and nothing remains of it in the body: and from this vein a certain thing issues forth in some men which is five palms and ten in length. And now it has come to me, because it protruded from a man of twenty palms.
But if it is cut into you during your time of treatment: then insert a needle into its hole and perforate it with a long hole, along with the body, until all that is in it is emptied out from matter: and administer corruption to the place with medicines for several days. Then treat the place itself with the cure of abscesses.
And this vein indeed sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot, or on the foot itself: and many openings occur to it, and a branch issues out from every opening.
Therefore, cure it as we said in the division, and with what has been said beforehand.
On the cutting of worms that have been generated under the skin, and it is called a horse affliction.
This affliction is called among us a horse affliction, on account of the fact that it often occurs in horses, and it is a small worm which is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it wanders throughout the body, ascending and descending, and is perceived by sense from member to member, until it bursts wherever it bursts through a place in the skin, and comes out.
And its generation is from the corruption of some humors. Just as worms and serpents, that is, earthworms and tapeworms occur in the belly.
And it is feared from its evil. Because when it itself goes into the body, and rises to the head, and reaches a place: then perhaps it opens up in it, and comes out, and destroys an eye: and that happens very often.
Therefore when you wish to cure it and extract itself, then it is not done unless during its movement, and appearance of itself to sense.
Therefore you should bind what is above it and what is below it with a strong binding tie. Then cut above it, and extract it.
But if it has sunk deep into the flesh, and you do not find it: then place a cautery with fire on top of the place, until it dies.
And more feared is its corruption, whereby it corrupts an eye, as we said.
But if you see it already having arrived at the head near the eye, then bind under it the eyebrow with a good binding. Then cut above it and extract it.
And it is necessary that the sick person should purify his body with medicines dissolving bad and foul humors.
And let him beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
Concerning the cutting over an ailment called Nakir.
This ailment is called Nakir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, then it passes from member to member.
And I myself have now seen it, just as I am telling you. I was called to a sick woman in certain villages. And she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm's tendon.
And after I had stayed an hour, I saw one swelling move with the flux, as a worm moves, ascending to her shoulder more quickly than it can be, just like quicksilver when it runs from place to place.
Therefore the pain receded from that place and was fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and it ran to the rest of the body until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that it was revolving throughout her whole body, just as I had seen.
I therefore marveled at the swiftness of its change from member to member. And I myself had not seen this ailment with my own eyes in such a manner before that time. But I had seen many who found the pain to be changed from member to member, and I did not see it myself with my own eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think that it is anything else, because the woman was from those people who have dry bodies and their veins are found to be detected: therefore this wind-like swelling appears to me to be changed.
And it is necessary that they not be visible according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies, of hidden veins.
Therefore when you wish to treat it and the patient feels that pain, then if it is visible to your eye as we said, then bind something over it quickly from above and below: and cut off above it until the swelling goes out: and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with purging of the body and with that which expels swellings, and plaster them with pills of stinking things, and pills of asafoetida, and similar things.
On the removal of arrows.
Arrows are differentiated according to their kinds, and according to the places in which they fall from the body.
Their diversity is that there are those with large points and small ones: and concave and curved. And among them are those which have three angles. And from them there are tongues. And from them there are stars.
Those however that fall according to members in which they fall, is according to two modes. Or else the members are of concave principal members, such as the brain and heart and liver and lung and kidney and intestine and bladder and those similar. Therefore when it falls into one of these members and signs of death appear to you which I will tell you next, then it is necessary for you to flee from the extraction of that arrow from them, because death follows him in whom it is, in many dispositions. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it and treat the wound.
When a bullet falls into the brain and penetrates the skull, and exits through the siphac that is above the brain, the symptoms are: because of it there occur numbness, weakness, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasm, and mixture of intellect, and choleric vomiting. And perhaps blood will issue from the nostrils or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off and voice is destroyed. And a white fluid like pus issues from the place of the wound. And it comes out similar to meat juice.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and draw out the arrow if it does not issue.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left nipple: and it feels as though itself is fixed in a hard thing, not in an empty one. And perhaps the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse: and blood flows from the wound that is black. And it follows that chillness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and syncope. Know therefore that death comes certainly nearby.
And the sign of the arrow when it wounds the lung is the issuance of frothy blood from the wound: and the vessels that follow the neck become inflamed, and their colour changes to that of an invalid. And it breathes out a large, deep spirit: and it seeks the inhalation of cold air.
Which if the arrow falls into the membrane that is in the breast: then it is near to the small ribs: and there is a great panting with severe pain, with sighing: and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested comes out from the wound.
And if an arrow falls into the abdomen and is stuck there: something exits from the wound, either feces or a intestine that has already ruptured. So then there is no hope for its cure, nor for the removal of the arrow.
Which if the arrow falls into the bladder and urine exits from it, and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is greater over the patient: then you will know that it is mortal.
But other members, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and scapula, and ribs, and furcula, and coxa, and leg, and similar ones are cured from their wounds according to many dispositions: when the arrow does not find an artery or a nerve, and the arrow is not poisonous.
And I tell you what I have seen regarding these kinds of arrows, so that you may know through it about your own cure.
Which is, because an arrow fell into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. So I extracted it from him on the other side, under the fat of his ear, and he was healed, and there was no damage to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not manage to extract it except for a small part of it, with which it adhered to its wooden shaft: and the arrow was large among the arrows of Turkish bows, with a light iron point, in which there are no barbs.
So the Jew was healed, and there did not occur any evil thing in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat.
And the arrow was Arab, and it is that one with barbs. I therefore attached to it two thread-like filaments, and already they were submerged in his throat. I have therefore managed to extract it from her with difficulty, until I drew it out: and the Christian woman was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man that had fallen into his belly: and we thought, that he would die from it.
After therefore thirty days had passed over him, and nothing in his conditions had been changed, I followed after the arrow: and I devised a plan for it, and I extracted it: and he was healed, and no evil thing happened to him.
And I saw a man upon whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound over it had been closed. After therefore seven years had passed, the arrow had come out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman upon whom an arrow had fallen into her belly, and the wound over it had been closed, and the arrow remained within her: and there was not changed anything in her conditions, and the woman did not find any harm from any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man upon whom an arrow had fallen into his face: and the wound was closed, and it remained, not finding much pain for him: and similar things to these many.
And I extracted an arrow from a man who was one of the king's princes, which had fallen into his middle nose, and it had already turned to the right side a little: and the arrow was completely hidden.
I was therefore called to his cure after the fall of the arrow for three days. I found then the wound of the arrow very tightly closed.
I therefore questioned it with a fine probe, and I did not feel it: and he indeed was finding a puncture and pain under his ear on the right side. I therefore hoped that the puncture was from the end of the arrow.
I therefore applied a dressing to the place with an ointment which had the virtue of attraction and digestion, trusting within myself that the spot would become inflamed, and I would see a sign of the arrow, so that I could cut over it: and no unfortunate event occurred in the place indicating that the arrow had followed it.
Therefore I applied a plaster on him for many days and an accident did not occur, and the wound was consolidated in the meantime. And he remained ill from the removal of it for a period of days until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I therefore placed on that wound a sharp and corroding medicine for many days until it was opened. And when I had touched it with a probe and felt the tip of the arrow which was adhering to the wood.
Then I added through the opening of the wound the sharp medicine until it appeared visibly to us that tip of the arrow, and a period of time passed with him about four months.
Then after the wound had been enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, but it did not obey going out. Then I did not cease to refine and devise over it with the means of artisans until one day with well-made forceps, in such a way as their shape fits at the end of the handle, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored. I therefore restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the sick person was healed with complete health, nor did anything bad happen to him at all.
And I tell you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you can place a rule and explanation over what I did not say.
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended with a narration, nor is it comprehended by that book, and a wise craftsman compares little to much: and what is present over what is absent: and he finds a new operation, and a new instrument among the descending things of foreign matters of this art when they occur.
Therefore, I say that arrows do not emerge from the limbs in which they are fixed, unless according to two modes. Or by means of attraction from the place from which it entered. Or from the opposite part of another one.
And that which emerges from where it entered is either an arrow going into a fleshy place and is attracted and emerges.
Which if it does not obey exit on the hour when it falls: then it is necessary that you let go of it for a few days, until the flesh around it has putrefied and its attraction has been eased, and its emergence facilitated.
And similarly if it is fixed in a bone and does not obey you to emerge, then let it go also for a few days; and then try it with attraction and movement every day, until it emerges.
Which if it does not obey you to emerge after days, then it is necessary that you make a perforation around the arrow in the bone itself from every part with a fine awl, until the arrowhead is enlarged. Then draw it out and extract it.
If, however, the arrow is already hidden within the body's location and is concealed from sense perception: then seek it out with a probe. If, however, you feel it, then pull it out with some instruments which suit its extraction.
If, however, you are not able to pull out over it, because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow in depth, and there is no bone, nerve or vein: then dig down over it, until the wound is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are ears in which it is stuck, then free the fixed flesh in them from all sides, by whatever means you can, and make use of instruments, if it cannot be pulled out over the evasion of flesh in the fracture of the ears and their twisting, until it comes out.
And you when administering the extraction of the arrow, in whatever place it is, then make use of twisting with your hand, with forceps to all parts, until you make it come out: and with subtle subtlety, so that the arrow itself does not break and its extraction becomes difficult for you.
And if you are unable to pull it out from one hour, then leave it for several days, until the things that are around it become putrid. Then proceed to pull it out again; for it will be more easily done if it has become softened. If, however, the extraction causes bleeding, then administer what we said in its cure in this chapter: and take care of your virtue from an incision of a vein or nerve or cord.
And administer the means of extracting the arrow in every way possible that it becomes easy and tranquil, or slow and firm, just as I told you.
And it is necessary that you do it as the patient is weakened, according to the figure, just as he was at the moment of the arrow's insertion. Since it is more useful. But if this is not possible for you, then administer as much as you can from what is available in forms.
But the arrow which comes out from the opposite part of another, either has already proceeded something to the outside: or makes a swelling at the end of the arrow by sense from the upper part of the skin nearby, and you see it prominent: therefore cut above it, and let the incision be according to the size that the forceps enclose in it.
Then draw it out: for indeed it becomes easy to come out.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrow bites into the bone and enlarges itself there: then draw it out.
And if not, leave it for a few days: then repeat it, until it comes out.
But if the wood of the arrow is in it, then push it along with it.
But if the wood has fallen and you wish to administer a push: then insert into it an instrument curved like a shell, so that its concavity may enter into the tail of the arrow: then push it along with it.
But if the arrow is curved, then push it out with the instrument entering into it. For the arrow is alleviated by that.
But if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary, so that you concave the entire flesh, into which the poison has entered: if this is possible for you. Then treat it with what suits that.
But if the arrow is falling in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the side: and is close to what you touch with a probe, and it is possible for you to cut over it: then cut, and beware of an incision into a vein, or nerve, and draw it out.
Then if you see a wound and heal it until it is well.
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
Their extremities should be similar to a bird's beak which is made of iron: when they take hold of the arrow, they do not let it go.
And they are made in many shapes, large and small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow's magnitude, its slenderness, and the width and constriction of the wound.
The shape of a concave plunger.
And the shape of a deaf plunger.
This is because of the deaf extremity like an arm to ease its entrance into a concave arrow and it is propelled with it.
On venesection or bloodletting.
The veins for venesection which have run their course in the body are thirty.
Of which there are sixteen in the head: two pulse-veins, which are behind the ears and called Two Herbs: and two arteries which are apparent in two temporal regions: and two veins which are in both tear ducts of two eyes, which are called Looking ones: and the vein that is prepared in the middle of the forehead: and the vein that is at the end of the nose. And the Two Guides, which are in the neck. And two veins which are on the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins which are on the lower lip. And those are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins that are let in the arms, are five in every arm.
One of them is Cephalica, and it is on the side of the elbow: and the common people call it the vein of the head. And the Bicuspid. And there is the Median vein, and it is made up of a branch of the Basilica and a branch of the Cephalica: and the common people call it the vein of the body. And the Basilica, and it is placed on the inner side: and it is also called the Titillicaris. And the common people call it the vein of the belly. And the vein of the arm, and it is placed above the elbow: and it is that one in which bloodletting is done, and it is that one which appears above the wrist with a very clear appearance.
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein that is between the Annular and the Minimus: and it has two branches.
And on the leg and on the foot there are three veins. One of them is that which is under the curve of the ankle from the side of the elbow. And the second one is the Saphena: and its place is at the heel from the inner side. And the vein Nesse: and its place is at the heel from the outer side.
And on the other leg there are three veins similar to those.
About bloodletting from two veins behind the ears.
The bloodletting from the two veins behind the ears is a remedy for old catarrhs, and hemicrania, and scabbing, and bad old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting from it is according to what I say. And it is, that the head of the infirm person is scraped: and his occiput is rubbed with a rough cloth in the place of the two veins with good friction. Then the patient tightens his neck with a cord until two veins appear. And their places are behind the ears, in two depressed places on the head. Therefore seek them with your finger and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark that place with pitch.
Then take a phlebotomy knife, and it is called an Incisive one. Then insert it under the vein on the skin, until the phlebotomy reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein with a cut of the skin cutting it. And let the length of the incision be the measure of two joined fingers, or about that much: and let blood flow out as much as you will.
Then bind it with lint, and leave it until it heals.
And already before the beginning of this book was their cutting and also their cauterization described.
The two arteries which are in the two temples' regions of phlebotomy bring benefit for an old headache, and a bad Sodam, and an obstinate Ophthalmia, and a current flow of excessive and sharp humors to the eyes.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to what I tell you. The patient tightens his neck much, until two veins appear to the sense as manifestly apparent: and it should be shown that their pulse is felt under your finger. Then mark with pitch.
Then lift the skin on top of the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the cutting instrument beneath it, and lift the vein upwards. And cut her, as you did to the other two veins, and let blood flow out according to your own necessity.
Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for one hour. Next, place a poultice and compresses on it, and bind it with strong constriction from above; and leave it until it heals.
And now there follows the remembering of those things, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
The remedy for venesection of the vein of the forehead is after cephalic venesection, for old pains in the face: and for half-hysteria, and redness: and foul ulcers.
And the quality of its venesection is, according to what I tell you. The patient constricts his neck with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called a Dore.
Place the sharp point which is on the head of the Dore over the vein, and strike upon it with a spatula, or with some other thing in its manner; and let the blood run according to the quantity that you wish. Then loosen the perforation of the patient, and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a wide lancet. However, it should not be a sharp-edged venesection, like the other venesecutions, but rather one with a wide edge. And venesection is done through it according to the opening: because the bone is close and perhaps the venesection will be broken when it is fine.
The remedy for the two veins which are in the two tear ducts of both eyes is for an eye from scabies and redness: and inflammation in the eye, and pains in the face.
And the quality of their bloodletting is, that they straiten a sick man's neck with a cord. Then let them do a bloodletting on her: and you be standing over her head.
And let the bloodletting be done across from front to back somewhat, with a small lancet, not very wide, for there is no flesh in that place. For if the bloodletting is too fine, perhaps it will break through.
Then let it flow out of the blood as much as you need. And place on her a poultice, and bind her for one night, and then release her.
The veins of the nose being bloodletted is beneficial against acute fever and severe heat, and also troubles of the face such as headache and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of this bloodletting is, that a sick man should straiten his neck with a cord. Then take hold of her nose with your left hand and grasp a thin lancet, long, and place it in the middle of the cartilage itself, between that which distinguishes the nose according to straightness. For there the vein does not appear to sight and because the blood begins to flow at once.
And it is necessary that you leave your hand with the lancet a little while and make flow out of the blood according to your need. Then bind her for one night. For she is restored quickly.
The benefit of bloodletting on both temples is for constriction of panting, and the beginning of leprosy, and troubles of melancholy, and scabies and bad ulcers, and eating corrotted things, that is, sores in the privates.
And the quality of venesection for them is that the sick person binds himself under both on his neck with a bandage: and the surgeon stands over the head of the sick person, and the sick person sits on a stool.
Then the venesection should be made to the length of the broad venesection for a short time. Then draw out from the blood a quantity tempered, or according to what necessity is present at that time. Then do similarly with the other vein.
Afterwards untie the bandage, and bind together the two veins with a moderate tightness: so that the sick person may not become overheated. And leave her until morning. For indeed the wound heals.
About venesection of veins, from Algeberich. And indeed the veins of Algeberich are beneficial for venesection: because they bring relief to the throat in the mouth, and corruption of the gums: and bad ulcers: and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, also which are in the nose, and about it.
And the quality of venesection for them is that you cause the sick person to sit before you: and bind his neck with a cord. Then turn back his lip and look at the two veins: of which one is on the right side of the lip, and the second on the left of him: and demonstration of both is by their blackness. And it is true that around them are small veins, black. Therefore cut both with a cut of piercing.
But if doubt is over you, and you do not know which of them it is: then look towards the cut of the larger of them, and the more apparent one.
And similarly do for the two veins which are in the upper lip: and very much customarily does it go with him: and cut the two veins which are in the lower lip.
On bleeding: The veins under the tongue after cephalic venesection. The utility of the bleeding of the two veins which are under the tongue: that is, the cephalic venesection is for obstructions that are in the throat, and affliction of the uvula, and ailments of the mouth.
And the quality of bleeding them is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and elevate his tongue, and look under his tongue from one side to see a vein, and on the other side to see another vein, and the color of each declivity to blackness.
So then bleed both of them, and be careful not to strike your hand too strongly when bleeding them. For under these are arteries, and perhaps it will happen that a flow of blood will come out from those arteries.
The three veins which are bled at the elbow are those of whose bleeding a custom has run in all men.
And their bleeding is done in two ways. Or by puncturing with a broad lancet of myrtle wood, or slitting to the thinness of the declivity, or by cutting with an instrument of small knife and is called Alnesil. And this is its shape.
And among them are the broad and thin types according to the width of the veins and their constriction. The form of a lancet of myrtle wood is broad, as you see. And it suits for opening veins that are concave, full, advancing, visible, thick, and those which contain thick, turbid blood.
And this lancet is of lesser width and thinner in the extremities.
And it suits for bleeding the veins that are thin, which contain clear blood.
However, one of these three useful venesections is that of the temple. Because it takes blood out of the sicknesses that are under the throat and neck, because they follow the chest and belly: and it is fitting for a venesectionist to beware of it, and be on guard from it, since there is an artery underneath. Therefore if he errs, and adds to the venesection cut, he will strike that artery, and a flow of blood will occur. Therefore it is necessary to let the person being venesected cut for himself in this place, or let him be cut by a barber.
But if the Basilica does not appear in a clear appearance, then it is necessary either to leave it and pass on to another place, or to seek out one of its branches; or to make a venesection at the bend of the arm. For it is clearly visible and should be cut by a barber-surgeon such as Alnesil, just as we said.
But if you wish to make a venesection of it itself, then before stretching out the arm, you should touch the place until you know the place of the pulse. Then mark the place with encaustum, afterwards stretch out the arm, and cut the vein with a concave sectioned cutting instrument with barber-surgeon Alnesil, just as we said. And be careful that the stroke not fall through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see that with you tightening the bandage there is an inflation in the place which you marked with encaustum, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery; therefore avoid it.
But if you see blood rising in the venesection like a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red: then know that it is from the blood of the artery. Then therefore hasten, and place your finger upon it in a wide space, then take away your finger. Therefore if blood is cut off (for it is often cut off) then bind the arm and let him go; and may the patient beware of its movement; and be over his fear.
And do not move it for some days until it heals.
But if blood is not cut off and you are overcome: and medicine is not present to you at that moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its extremities are contracted, and blood is cut off.
Or take the skin of a ligature and sew it, take half one and bind it over the place of the vein strictly constricted, with a cord and lint until another day.
Then if blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then treat him with the same remedy as that which precedes from the place of dusts cutting off the flow of blood: and cutting off his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of binding from the arm.
But the benefit of bleeding the dark vein is that it draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower body; therefore, because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic, as we said.
And it is suitable for the phlebotomist to be over his fear because of its bleeding, for under it is a nerve. Therefore if the phlebotomist adds to the wound of bleeding and finds a nerve, it happens in that place a numbness, and its healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it does not heal at all.
And this nerve is often felt by the sense. If it however is hidden in certain people and is subtle and does not show itself: then you must put your cupping glass so that you may suck out the bad humors, a cut with aloes and scrape the nerve with your strength.
But if the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
Of the Head Vein. The bloodletting of the head vein is beneficial, because it draws blood from the head and relieves sufferings of the eyes.
And it is necessary in this vein itself, if you wish, to bloodlet from it with a gold-tipped lancet, or with a myrtle-tipped lancet: because it is the most safe of all veins, since there is no artery beneath it nor nerve.
However it suits you well to use a cupping glass at the bloodletting, so that you scratch with it only as far as the head of the finger and look for a softer place: and it does not harm him if it is not found with the first stroke, in order to be done over it again with the cupping glass several times.
However perhaps an abscess will form on some people if they are not bloodletted in the first stroke, but it does no harm to them that abscess.
Of the utility of Bloodletting and the precautions to be observed in it. However, the quality and incidents of Bloodletting from which you should think about how to remedy them.
First therefore of this is that you should know, that bloodletting is not administered unless for the preservation of health and its perseverance, and caution from the advent of illnesses.
And that bloodletting is done in one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the Head vein, and the Black vein, and the Basilar vein. And that bloodletting is done at the beginning of Spring on fasting, in spring and summer: and autumn and winter after digestion, when signs of repletion appear.
And let phlebotomy be done on the first day, or on the third, after three hours have passed since sunrise.
But the phlebotomy that is administered for illnesses does not have a fixed time; but when necessity and convenience call for it, either at night or by day, and at any hour and at any time.
And boys should not be let blood until they have come to fourteen years of age. Nor should a pregnant woman be let blood except from the fourth to the seventh month. And also not those who have passed sixty years of age should be let blood.
Therefore when someone wants to be let blood for any reason: it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels beforehand with a gentle clyster, if there is much dung retained in them; so that they may not draw the veins during phlebotomy towards their superfluous and putrid contents which are harmful to the main limbs.
And neither should a patient be let blood who is sated with nausea, nor drunk, nor fleeing from drunkenness, until that has been removed from them. Nor the weak with dropsy.
And let phlebotomy be avoided again after the passion of colic, and vomiting, and flow of the belly, and multiplication of coitus, and labor, and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and all that dissolves virtue from bodily or animal substance.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before it, if blood is thick with food and drink, and medicines: if it is possible to him.
Then let him enter a bath, if nothing prevents him: or exercise in some manner, so that the blood may be thinned.
And place his phlebotomy on the chest, around the third part of the day, as we said: and attempt to have him be emptied that day from all bad animal accidents, such as constriction, and anger, and fear: and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and pain, and superfluities, and those similar things.
And let him sit in his presence those things with the use of which custom has run in men, by virtue of their aromatics, and odors, and festivities, and similar things to them, as much as possibility allows.
Then let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion higher than that of the patient who is to be bled: afterwards let him take out his arm and rub it with his hand twice or thrice. Then let him tie the ligature with a cord, and wrap it around twice.
And let the constriction be moderate, because a constriction that is uneven, or because of excess in the constriction, then prevents the flow of blood: or in relaxation, then also prevents the flow of blood.
Then after the constriction it is necessary that the one to be bled should rub his hands together until the veins are swollen and become apparent to the senses.
Then let the phlebotomist wipe the area to be bled with a little old oil properly.
Then let him place the tip of his left index finger on the vein under the spot where he wants to make the bleed, slightly so that the vein does not flee and the blow may be struck. Because veins are like a string that flees from the phlebotomist's touch: and they are full of blood-vessels: and when you place the phlebotomy instrument on them, they contract under it and deceive the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomy does not open the vein: and if it opens it, it is constricted: therefore it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and careful in all these things.
Then let him put down the phlebotomy instrument. If therefore the vein is opened from one side, then it is well. And if not, then do it the other way round under that place a little, or above it with haste: if the spot does not suppurate.
If an abscess forms, or if the patient is inflamed, then leave him for a day, or two days: and do not tighten the bandage. Perhaps indeed the abscess will attract heat. Nor should he enter a hot bath.
Then let him be bled again, if it helps.
If the opening is small or the blood flows thinly and you fear that not enough will come out: then do the bleeding again into the very same spot, according to what is right, and add a little more in the procedure.
And do it with haste, before the place becomes an abscess, for a place that is small during the operation often turns into an abscess.
Therefore if you see it already become an abscess, then do not bleed on it at all, for nothing excuses you. And put something from the fat of oil on it, because it will ease the flow of blood. And it is better in this place than oil itself, and than other oils.
And similarly administer the fat of oil in every bleeding of yours, by which you bleed veins against the flow of blood: and they are called tyriaca alfarach and sagzenea, when it is put from one of them over the place.
For the blood becomes thinner and is resolved, when it is thick.
If it happens that a great abscess forms at the place of bleeding, for it often happens, especially to those who are not bled except in that way, or whose vein is small and open, then hurry and put a sponge soaked in warm water and salt over the place, and bind it tightly for an hour: because it will dissolve.
And you must do that after the blood has come out of the vein itself, with its completion, or from another vein.
If something of blackness or greenness remains in the place after a day, it does not harm; and if you wish, put something of aloes, or myrrh's solvent over it: or something from mint juice, that is, calaminth, or similar to it.
And many times indeed abscesses and swellings occur among those who are let blood at the church.
Therefore place your hand on it, then if you find softness at the pressure upon it, then that swelling is bad. Be careful therefore, to place something over it from what we said. For perhaps blood will flow out of her from the artery.
But make a plaster for him with that in which is pungency, so that the place may harden. Then care for him with the rest of the treatment, until he be healed.
And it is necessary that you let out blood from every man according to the quantity of his strength. And what appears by the color winning over the blood.
For blood if it is black, then let it out until it becomes red: and similarly if you see it to be thick, then let it out until it thins: and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness is taken away.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and needs blood letting once, that the venesection be increased on the other side, and thus he may be a left-handed bleeder: and contrariwise for the weak one.
And it is necessary that he let it out in turns, and that the opening be narrow: and better what is administered in venesection is, that it be a cross-cutting incision, not a puncture.
And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and cutting of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection by breadth and length.
And to him who is accustomed to syncope at venesection, it is necessary that he eat before venesection a little bread dipped in grape juice water: or chicory, if he is heated: and let out from his blood in three turns, or four.
And if the complexion is chilled, then let him take before bloodletting a bread dipped in a honey syrup, or in a honey syrup flavored with spices, or in an aromatic syrup that smells.
Which if it happens during bloodletting and is the cause of the exit of much blood: then he must take in drink a broth of meat, and a subtle aromatic syrup, and use aromatics with aloe, and anoint his chest with them: and use the other things which we said in division in the chapter on syncope from evacuation.
But he who wants to succeed in cutting his arm and letting out his blood a second time: it is necessary for him whose bloodletting is because of great evacuation, and whose strength is weak, that he let out the blood gradually by the amount of his strength over continuous days.
Whoever however wants to cut his arm and let out his blood a second time, and his body is strong: then he should do it after seven hours or nine from his first bloodletting.
Whoever however wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite side to which it declines: it is necessary that he succeed on the second day, or on the third.
In whose body there is much blood already warmed and made acute, and makes a fever occur: it is necessary that the blood go out from him on one side, and a great quantity be drawn from him: and the opening be enlarged until syncope occurs: after you have been preserving all the conditions of bloodletting: and as you put your hand over his pulse at the course of blood, so that death does not occur in place of syncope. For indeed it often occurs when the bloodletter is unaware and carelessness falls.
And it is not necessary when you want to cut the arm and let out the blood a second time, with the vein already closed and the exit of blood made difficult, that you press on it with violence, and stretch it curved quickly. For that is a great evil, nay, abandon it until it be bled a second time.
Or remove with the sharpness of a lancet that which is coagulated from blood in the opening of the vein, and place over it something dissolved salt in water. And put over it something from Tyrian crocus or saffron, and put it under a gentle compression until the blood goes out.
If however there is now an abscess in the vein, then abandon it and do not bind it until the abscess has subsided.
Which if necessity calls for letting out blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either let the blood from above that place or in another arm in another vein.
However the sinew of the arm is let out at the place of the Basilica and Fuscæ, when these are not found and are hidden, because it is compounded from them.
And the quality of its bleeding is, that the patient puts his hand into warm water until it reddens with heat and the vein becomes apparent.
Then let a bandage be wrapped over it with a thread in moderate constriction. Then let the bleeding be done across in a gradual manner, not widthwise nor along its length: and let the opening be wide, and let your bleeding be over the join of the hand for a little while.
Which if the outlet of blood is hindered, then repeat with your hand into warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve what is necessary for you.
If however it be days of summer, then excuse yourself from repeating your hand in warm water. And indeed the flow of blood is put into warm water most frequently in winter time.
And the bleeding of this vein is safer for all veins, since there is no pulsating artery under it, nor a nerve.
The art of bloodletting with the right hand is the relieving of afflictions related to the liver.
And the quality of this bloodletting is that you tie a band or strip on your hand with a cord, after you have put it into hot water until the vein swells and becomes very sensitive. Then perform the bloodletting by crossing it over. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm him at all.
And take care, so that your hand does not become sore from the bloodletting. For under it are the naked nerves of the fingers stripped bare of flesh.
Then repeat the hand in the hot water and let the blood flow from it. For if you do not repeat the hand in hot water, the blood will congeal in the vein's opening and prevent it from flowing.
When therefore you have extracted the necessary quantity of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot quickly.
And similarly it is necessary to do with every tightly bound branch.
The ointment of the bloodletting from the left hand is because it relieves afflictions of the spleen and similarly do with this bloodletting as you did in the second equally.
The ointment of the great vein bloodletting is for afflictions in the lower part of the body, such as womb diseases and retention of menses, and infirmities of the kidneys, and old ulcers of the hips and legs and similar ailments.
And the quality of this bloodletting is that the infirm person puts his foot into hot water and makes a friction on it until the veins swell, and ties above the ankle with a cord. And indeed the place of the veins is near the heel, appearing towards the thumb, and they branch out from it into the face of the foot many branches.
Venesection therefore should be done on a larger branch of it, or near the heel in its gathering; for it is better and safer.
If venesection be done on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves which are beneath it over the face of the foot.
And place your venesection in a direction across it, as if you were cutting it through, and the venesection should be incised.
But if outlet of blood is prevented, then go on to soak his foot in warm water, and let the blood run into it until it be emptied.
But if the surgeon makes a mistake and misses the vein on the first try, then repeat the venesection somewhat higher up, for the place is safe, and you do not fear evil from it, when you beware of nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the vein on the other foot, which is equal to the saphenous vein.
But the location of the sciatic veins, as we said, is near the heel on the outside of the lateral part.
And the benefit of venesection in that place is for pain of the ankle, when it is because of hot blood.
And the quality of venesection in that place is, so that the infirm person hastens into hot bath and quickens; and bind his leg on the side of the ankle up to the heel with a long thin strip, because it only appears because of that.
Therefore when it appears, then venesection should be done according to whatever method is possible for you, or across it; and it is better, either by cutting it with an incision, or by taking it out with a section. For the place of that vein is safer and itself is very much hidden in many men.
For the place of that vein is safer and itself is very much hidden in many men. But if you do not find it and it does not appear to the sense at all: then venesection should be done on one of its branches, and that is which appears in the back of the foot and towards the ear; and beware of the nerves, and let run as much blood as you wish.
Then loosen the constriction, and place skin over the site of bloodletting, and bind the place. For indeed the wound is quickly healed.
Concerning wind [gas] inflation, and its proper use.
Wind inflations are made from horns, and from air, and from vitreous [substance].
And wind inflation is indeed done in two ways. With scarification and bloodletting: and the other is wind inflation without scarification.
And this wind inflation which is without scarification is done in two ways. Or it is with fire. or it is without fire.
And wind inflations that are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen places of the body. Of which one is the wind inflation of Alnocrati, and it is at the back of the head: and Alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck: and wind inflations of Alhagdahim, and they are two plates of the neck from both sides together: and wind inflations of the mind, and it is under the jaw in the lower part of the face: and wind inflations of the spatulas, and they are at the elbow joints: and wind inflations of Alachosos above the end of the tail: and wind inflations of the two focii, and they are in the middle of the two arms: and wind inflations of the two legs: and wind inflations of the two heel-bones.
And indeed wind inflation does not extract blood from you from small scattered veins in the flesh, and because of that its power is not present in them, as is the case with bloodletting. Nor is it necessary to administer wind inflation, whether with fire or without fire, for any kind of sickness that arises from fullness, until the whole body has been emptied.
But if necessity calls for wind inflation due to illness, or because of habit, we administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in its middle, and at whatever time may be.
Which is this: because from men there is who when he multiplies in him blood, until he needs its extraction through venesection, finds a heaviness in his head, and jaundice.
And from them is he who findspletion and redness in his face, on his head, and on his neck. And from them is he who finds itching in his face and forehead, and cloudiness and dullness in their eyes.
And from them is he who scrapes the place of venesection of himself. And from them is he whose laughter multiplies. And from them is he who finds the taste of blood in his mouth: or his tongue has become infected and spits up blood. And from them is he whose sleep multiplies. And from them is he who sees blood and redness, and the slain, and wounds, and things similar to these in his sleep.
When therefore we see something from these and properly if it is in the third part of the month: we then prescribe venesection to be done after two hours or three have passed since daybreak.
The juice of venesection from the neck is: because itself brings to heaviness in the head, and what is poured out to the eyes. But however it ought to be that it is after evacuation of the whole body.
And this indeed is a venesection in place of phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not allowed for him to use it who has a cold constitution, or who has a running nose. For it brings him great harm.
And because of that it is not fitting for old men, and for those in whose head are cold sicknesses.
But he who makes himself frequent with this generates forgetfulness over him.
And therefore it is necessary for you to order a Ventosari to place his hand with the ventosa a little at the lower parts, fearing from the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventosatio or Alkehel is a place for dark bleeding and basilical bleeding. And because of this it cures the hiccough and constriction of breath, and instrumented hiccup and coughing, and repletion.
And it is necessary to push the ventosia alkehel a little, because if it is placed lower down, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
The ventosia alhagdahim indeed cures pains occurring by accident in the head, and eye pain, and headache, and perforation, and tooth root pain; and it is a place for basilical bleeding.
And it is necessary to order the ventosari not to press his hand with a scarification so that he may not touch an artery and there occur a flow of blood.
The ventosia however under the chin cures ulceration in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar ailments which are in the mouth; and it is a place for alieherich bleeding which occurs in both lips.
The ventosia however of the spatula cures alchafacham which is caused by constriction and heat.
The ventosia however of the internal parts of two cup-like formations cures the benefit of bleeding from the three veins, Basilicae, Fuscae, and Cephalicae: because it attracts blood from all those small veins which are in the flesh; and those small veins attract blood from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary to order the ventosari not to proceed too much in scarification because the place is stripped of flesh and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
A type of blister (ventosa) is applied over a swelling (alchausos), it benefits hemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And you should order the ventosas to be large and made of air: because the place needs strong suction, and perhaps the thin ventosas break: and let them be punctured with a large incision.
The ventosas of the legs decrease (the swelling) by clear diminution: because they draw blood from the whole body and bring relief to old pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder: they provoke menstruation, and bring relief to boils, and fistulas: and stand as a place for phlebotomy of the two saphenous veins, and for the opening of ulcers.
But they weaken the body much, and cause syncope to occur in many people.
And the benefit of ulcers of the ventosas is close to the benefit of ventosas on both legs.
The quality of the position of the ventosas is that you place the ventosa in a first vacuum and suck with temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the ventosas, but quickly put them on and quickly take them off, so that the humors come to the location in equal arrival: and do not cease to repeat it and continue, until you see the place already red and inflamed, and the appearance of the redness of blood appears: then scarify and iterate suction gradually. Then consider the position of the body.
For those among men who have delicate skin, a few pores, it is necessary to scarify them once, not more: so that the location does not become ulcerated.
And order the ventosa-maker to amplify the scarification and make it a bit deep: and moderate the suction with ease, speed, and gentle motion.
If there is coagulation in the blood, then it is necessary to scarify them twice. In the first incision indeed there is opened up a path for the subtlety of blood and its fluidity: and in the second indeed an examination of the extraction of thickened blood.
If the blood is very feculent, then let there be a scarification in the third incision, so that the ultimate result may follow.
And as for the ultimate step, when we wish to draw out blood little by little or a bit at a time, one single scarification is sufficient for us. Which if we wish the extraction of blood in many places, let us make multiple scarifications.
And if we measure, that the blood is thick: then it behooves us, to make a deep scarification: and the limit equal in scarification, is the depth of the skin.
What that thing is which it behooves to be administered from oils at the placing of wounds, and what a ventosandus should beware.
In that one indeed whose skin is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are tight, it behooves that the places of the wound to be anointed with oils which are openers, soothers, resolvents: if in the time of summer, as is oil of alkikeri, or oil of violatum, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cucumber seed.
And if it is in the time of winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or cammomile oil, or sardinian oil: and similar things to these.
If indeed the superfluity is thick, cold: then oil should be bitter almond oil, or oil of balsamita, or white oil, or oil of anethion: and similar things to these.
If indeed the ventosand is of wide pores, tender flesh: then it behooves that he be kept from oil, and it behooves that those places of wounds be washed with rose water, or with cold water, or with solatri water, or with cucumber water, or with portulaca water: and similar things to these.
He, however, whose blood is of great humidity, shall wash the ulcers with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things to them.
And he whose discharges are coarse, shall wash the ulcers with old wine, or with water of saponaria, or with a decoction of dill, or of chamomile, and similar things to them.
And it is necessary that ulceration be avoided in a bath, or in the water of a bath; nay, rather, it is necessary to administer after exiting from the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
And it is not fitting that someone should sleep after ulceration.
What is to be observed for the regulation of Ulcerative sores, or Bleeders before ulcers are opened.
AND after that it is necessary to observe first: then if Ulcerative or Bleeder be choleric, and have dominion over his blood sharpness and inflammation: then it is necessary for him to take cooling things, as the fruit of a pomegranate: and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and centaury and juniper: and similar things.
And put cooling foods before him, such as eggs, and the flesh of young birds cooked well, and uncooked foods with wild herbs: and similar things.
And for whom the complexion is cold, it is necessary for him to take in drink a syrup made from honey, or from almonds, or from calaminth made from seeds: and he shall take wine that has a medium odor, which is between old and new: and it is commanded that he shall use moderation of food. And put before him food such as eggs, and canes, and sparrows, that is, small birds: and he shall eat the eggs of pigeons.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of ulceration and bleeding should be more than the food: and it is necessary to give in drink to certain people in hours of sharp fever aloes or medicine made from musk, that is muscata, or alesselithe before ulceration: and before bleeding, or after, so that the main limbs may be strengthened and the blood thinned. And it should not be taken with a warmed drink.
On Fissures without Scarification. Those however which are without scarification, are those that are placed over the liver, and spleen, and podagram, and over the belly, navel, and places of the kidneys, and pixidem anchae; because these members do not endure scarification on themselves.
And inquiry is not made through them, unless an application of blood from one member to another: as when we place a Ventoza over the nipples in a disease of flowing blood from the nostrils. And we use them to dissolve from the member an uncleaned and cold effluvia on the member: as when we place a Ventoza over the belly and navel. For it itself rarefies the member, and warms it, and removes the pain therefore, because it resolves that effluvia.
And also it is placed over the kidneys, when there occurs a blockage or stone in them. For by the virtue of its attractive power it perhaps opens the blockage, or eradicates the stone from its place.
And similarly it does when placed over the liver and spleen for cleansing of an effluvia in both of them.
And these Ventozas are administered empty with a cut only. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered full with warm water in cases of pleurisy; and that is, so that the Ventoza may be filled and be large, either with hot water alone or with water in which herbs suitable to it have been steeped.
The shape of a Ventoza administered with fire.
The size of the opening of it should be two fingers opened wide, according to how we have formed it. And its quantity in depth is half a palm: and there is on one side of it, at the place which is near its middle, a small hole, according to the size that the needle enters into it. It is made from air together, or citron, with thick smooth equal edges, so as not to hurt the member where it is placed upon it. And there is in the middle of it a cross-piece transversely from air, or iron, where the candle with fire is put.
And now this ointment is made great, greater than what we have said, and somewhat less so, according to the illnesses and age of him who uses it.
For the wind-swept boys and those with slender bodies are others than the wind-swept men and those of sturdy bodies.
But the quality of putting this ointment with fire on the body is, to set alight a linen wick or a small candle from wax and place it over the middle vein which is in the middle of the ointment: so that the fire may be ignited about the lower part of the ointment, lest the sick person's body be burned.
Then it is placed on the body and a finger is put over the hole which I said, until when we hold the ointment: while we are in need, we remove the finger, and steam will come out over that hole, and the ointment will dissolve immediately.
Then set alight the linen by fire in its own manner, and repeat it if you need to that one.
But in the ventosa which is administered in the pain of pleurisy with water, there is no transverse vein nor hole: and it is not administered, unless the water fills it, and it is placed only on the body.
And this is its form.
And as much as this ventosa is larger to take in a great deal of water, it is better.
About the suspension of Bloodlettings.
Bloodlettings are not administered in many cases, unless there is an impossibility of placing ventosas on account of their smallness, such as the lip and gum, and things similar to them. Or on a bare member from skin, such as a finger and nose, and those similar to them.
And the quality of using them is: that the leeches from the bloodlettings which are in sweet, clean waters free from putrefactions.
Then they are released day and night into sweet water, until they are famished, and nothing remains in their bellies. Then the body is evacuated first with bloodletting, and with emetics. Then cleanse the afflicted member until it becomes red. Then they are placed on top of it.
Therefore when they fill up and come out, and there is a possibility of drawing the place with an emetic, then it is most beneficial for recovery. And if not, then wash the area with vinegar. Then with much water, it is rubbed and squeezed out.
And if the flow of blood continues after a wound, and that is dripping from it, then pour a linen cloth into cold water, and place it on top, until the dripping stops.
And if blood multiplies, then powder thereto crushed zege or gall nuts, and similar things from stypses, until the blood stops.
Or place over the place halves of peeled beans, and let them go until they stick to the place, for the blood is stopped.
And it is necessary if a repetition of the purging is necessary, when possible, to change them.
But if leeches are prevented from suspending themselves, then the place is cleaned with fresh blood. Or stick a pin into the places until something comes out of the blood. Then they are placed there, for themselves when they feel something coming from the blood, stick right away.
Therefore when you wish them to fall, powder something over them from crushed aloe, or salt, or ash, and they will fall right away.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of Medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations that have occurred in bones.
Know, sons, that the foolish doctors and common people boast about this Chapter, and those who have never looked at an old book, nor read a single letter from it.
And because of this reason, the method of treatment is concealed among our people. And I have never found in it anything good at all, and I did not attain that which I attained except because of the length of reading old books and diligence over understanding them, until I extracted knowledge from them.
Then I adhered to experimentation and diligent study for the length of my life.
And now I have described for you from it all that my knowledge contains in this Chapter: and beyond what has passed the test of my experiment, after I shortened it for you, and freed it from the burden of prolixity, and shortened it at the end of abbreviation, and showed it at the end of declination: and I have formed many shapes in it from the forms of instruments which are administered in it, since it is from the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary, when saying the preface to this Chapter, to declare the summaries of speech and chapters, by whose understanding the artist is compelled in the first place to stand over their truth: that is, so that you and those who are ready may know or learn this noble art, and others through you.
I say therefore that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or a fall occurs to someone, then it is necessary to rush first to bleed them and to dissolve the pain, or both at the same time: if nothing prevents this, such as weakness of strength: or if the person who has experienced something from these is a child or an old decrepit man: or if it is a time of intense heat or very intense cold.
Then let him be content with his food, cold vegetables, the flesh of birds and hares, and prohibit wine, and thick meats, and to fill himself from foods and all food that fills the veins with blood. Until when you are secure from the warm boil and do not fear a flowing of matter to the member, then the sick person shall return to his original regimen with which he was accustomed.
So when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary for the sick person to be fed nourishing foods with much nourishment, thick, heavy, and sticky; such as food made from boiled wheat with water, and roots, and heads, and feet, and stomachs of mussels, and eggs, and fresh fish: and strong wine, and similar things. For by this regimen the coagulation of the fracture is done more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in the veins of those who are in the first old age and decrepitude, it is not possible for them to be continuously and firmly consolidated according to their own nature, because of the drying out of their members: and they are consolidated and continued which are at the end of calmness, as the bones of young children.
However, nature connects to the broken bone from all parts something similar to glue, with thickness, by which it adheres and binds itself, until they are stuck together and bound together, until it comes to an end of strength and firmness as was in the beginning, until nothing prevents it from operating: and because of this reason it is necessary for you to put nourishment into the sick person food-like substances, with heaviness and stickiness and thickness, such as we said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of members: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head of a bone: and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone: and similarly all the remaining members exist differently among themselves: and I come with the recollection of every species of fracture exposed in its own chapter, distinguished from another. And the species of fractures of a bone are differentiated also within itself.
For there is a fracture that is curved, and besides which happen to be splinters in it. And sometimes it happens that a fracture occurs along the length of the bone: and there are splinters from it, that is, shavings, and additions proceeding, just as are on a reed when a pen is sharpened for writing. And not proceeding; and it is a fracture with an open wound and disruption at the head; and it is a small fissure.
And every species has its own skill or tool for restoring it, according to the recollection of it which will come separately in its places.
And from what is known of a fracture of the bone, there is its curvature and its prominence, and its appearance to sense, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
So when the curvature is not appearing in place, nor does it make a sound to your touch when you touch the bone with agitation, nor does the afflicted person find great pain: then there is no fracture there, rather it may be that there is a curvature or small fissure. Therefore it is not necessary to move it entirely with your hand and compression, but rather place above it medicines of which the recollection comes after the moment that suits the place; then let a fine bandage be wrapped around it.
And know that the place when it is curved and split into two, besides which happen to be splinters in it, yet all part is removed from its fellow: then you must begin at your hour for its correction, equalizing it before a warm abscess comes upon it.
If however a hot abscess occurs in him, then leave him for several days until the abscess becomes quiet. Then apply it evenly to him by whatever manner is suitable and gentle.
And know that his restoration and its adjustment are easier than that of bones in which suppurations occur.
Then bind him tight as a reminder comes to you.
If indeed there are suppurations in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, if a hand or foot: or with your own hand, if the member is small: or with two cords, or with a cord and a staff.
And let your position be such as you place the member over an equal place, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken limb are stretched: then try to return all the additions with every ingenuity and in whatever way you can in their places: and beware, according to your strength, lest there occur on a weak person pain or hurt through your operation. And try, according to your strength, to apply one of two bones together with its fellow, according to better forms.
And it is necessary at that time for you to test and feel him with your own hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it and make it even by the extent of your skill.
And beware a strong extension and forceful compression, as many foolish people do. For indeed they often cause a hot abscess or contraction in the member to occur through their operation, as we have seen many times from their operations.
Then connect after the adjustment, and decent operation, and tightening of that member, and rest, and tranquility: and warn the sick person to be careful with it. And have him avoid moving it during his waking hours and sleep at the time of its revolution and agitation, and at its emission and all its movements with his last strength. And so that he may be cautious, lest the position of the member be such as would follow with pain. Which is that when he feels pain or injury in the position of the member, then it behooves him to change it into another position from which he does not feel pain.
And beware with him, so that its position be straight and even: lest there occur twisting of the member when it is restored.
And the quality of the fracture of the bone is, as I say.
Know that fractured bones are differentiated by their smallness and largeness, and their shape.
Which therefore of them are small, such as the arm and finger and fist and similar to these, then it behooves that there be a wrapping of soft, thin cloth. Which however of them are large, such as the thigh and leg, it behooves that there be a wrapping around them of something wide and hard.
Because a wide bandage connects the large member and tightens it from all parts equally so that no bruise enters into it.
Then begin after your evacuation from equality to place a suitable poultice over the spot of the fracture itself, in soft flour. Then begin to wrap the bandage over the spot of the fracture itself three times, or four, according as the member deserves it: and bind your hand a little with the bandage.
Then go with him to the upper part from the place of the fracture and bind less than was your previous binding which bound the broken place. Then stretch out with the bandage from the place of the fracture a little and soften the binding gradually until you take hold from the healthy place something great.
Then take another cloth and wrap it again over the broken place with bandages. Then go with ligature to the lower part from the fracture. And let your operation be in tightening of the ligature and softening of it, according to what we said in the first ligature above.
Then place between the ligatures a soft sponge or cloth so that it matches the winding of the fracture, if there is winding in it; and if not, put nothing in it.
Then tie another bandage over it on top. Then apply over these ligatures stars made of cotton as soon as possible, if there is no swelling and no warm abscess.
But if there is swelling or abscess in it: then place over it what keeps that abscess down, and takes away the swelling: and leave it for some days. Then tie on top of it the stars again.
And let the stars be from the middle of wide reeds that are smooth and well-shaped: or they may be from wood where sieves are made which come from pine or geraid, that is, the branches of a palm tree, or calingi; and let the width of all the stars be according to this form and same shape.
But it is necessary that the star which is put over the break, be somewhat thicker and wider than the other stars: and the length of the star be according to as much as allows a limb by size and smallness.
Then tie over the stars with another bandage, according to the same first tightening. Then bind over with threads decently, according to what we said about tightening; and it is, that your tightening above the place of the fracture be more, and as much as it goes further away from the fracture, the tightening be less.
And it is necessary that the threads be middle in thickness and subtlety, and be of soft flax.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operations of foolish people who put their threads made from twisted linen strings, it is a great mistake: because the tightening falls off with them outside the quality.
And fine threads are not suitable again; because you cannot follow with them what you wish by tightness.
And it should not be less than a finger between one anchor and another.
But if the sick person is injured by the edges of the anchors after tightening in sound places: then put beneath them a piece of soft wool, or fluffed wool, until nothing is hurt from it.
But when there is a fracture with a wound, and a disruption occurs on the skin, I go up to him with remembrance of it in chapter two by singularity.
And know that not every broken member is to be tightened with anchors from the first day. For this reason is that a member when it is large should not be put on top of anchors unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the event of hot postemat formation.
And this is the method of plasters by which the ancients restored them, which are put over a fracture and dislocation.
A Method of Common Plaster abbreviated for restoring a fracture, suitable to many complexions, especially women and children, because it is something over which neither heat nor cold prevails.
And it is that you take from the flour mill dust, and it is the heart of the flour which hangs on the walls of the mill with the movement of the millstone: and you make it as it is, except that you sift it with egg white: and put its composition not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
A Method of Another Plaster for restoring a fracture, and dislocation, and twisting. Recipe aloes, and ladanum, and acacia, and enula, and myrrh, each of them a pound and a half of each. And the juice of all together ten ounces of myrrh, and five ounces of aloes each, and alethi, twenty pounds are crushed, sifted, and mixed with alethi water: or with egg white if the complexion of the sick is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is itself a good composition, quickly restores broken bones and brings relief to many people.
Another method of plaster that also cures fractures and sprains. Recipe equal parts of wax, honey and white almonds. Add the weight of 10 myrrh, 5 aloes, and 6 acacia together 20 Armenian boli. Grind all these with much pounding and sieving, and make them into a paste with water or egg white: and administer them.
Another method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places: it soothes the pain that occurs to them, and the crack in the bone and fracture. Sheep's wool is taken, submerged in vinegar and boiled oil, and placed over the place.
And in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good for soothing hot boils and properly driving out pains.
Another method of plaster that restores a broken bone. Take the leaves of mute figs and the leaves of wild poppy: and pound all together, and make a plaster from both.
Another brief method of plaster administered for the restoration of a fractured bone: and when you wish the resolution of the remaining boil. Recipe equal parts of the root of white plantain, camomile, violets and herb flour: grind all these together, and make them into a paste with wine, if the limb is not hot.
If it is heated, then make that plaster with moist coriander water, or with water, and use it.
Another stronger method of plaster for the resolution, than this first one, when a hard boil occurs in the restoration of a member. Recipe equal parts of the root of white plantain, flaxseed, balaustion, mellilot, hellebore, violets and camomile: grind all these together, and make them into a paste with willow water, or sweet water, or wine. The whole of that [treatment] is according to the warmth of the member and the quiescence of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that anything should be put on a fractured member for its restoration, except the plaster made from wax and oil: nothing else; and he told that it should be midway between bulkiness and thinness.
However Galen it seemed was of the opinion that things should be put on a fractured member for its restoration in which is dryness of heat, such as myrrh and aloes and frankincense, and similar to these from those we have mentioned.
The method of the plaster that is used for injury and pain. Take barley and chickpeas and the hairs of human teeth or the feathers of a bird or an antelope, and equal parts of salt: they are to be ground and sifted and mixed together: and from it make a plaster.
However the quantity by which it is necessary that the ligature remain and then dissolve, you must consider thus: if no pain or itching befalling the sick person, nor does the fractured bone move from its place: then do not dissolve it in many days. But if it befall him in the place a severe itching or disturbing pain or swelling: then hasten and dissolve it in an hour itself, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth or a soft seaweed sponge moistened: and immerse it in warm water and wash the place with it until the itching ceases and the pain is soothed.
But if it befall him in the place a severe itching or disturbing pain or swelling: then hasten and dissolve it in an hour itself, and remove the plaster from him: and take a soft cloth or a soft seaweed sponge moistened: and immerse it in warm water and wash the place with it until the itching ceases and the pain is soothed. Then let the member rest for one hour. Then place on it a cloth that has been cut short, immersed in vinegar and oil or rose oil: and bind above it for one night, until you are secure from suppurative heat, and the swelling of the member is calmed down, and its pain is removed.
Then go back with him to a fine stricture, and apply a small poultice: and do not tighten the first constriction on him, and along with it, until he is healed.
And if you see that the pustule, and redness, and pain, and swelling, and all the accidents have been completely removed, and he is still in need of the poultice and constriction, then go back to it just as you did at first equally.
And if anything of what we said does not happen to the member, then do not loosen it, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is let go twenty days after that, the whole of it, according to what appears to you from the loosening of the member, as we said, until when the fracture adheres and coagulation of flesh approximates over it: add also then in the constriction more than your first constriction altogether: and add also at that time a thickening of food for the infirm, according to what has been remembered before.
But if you see the place of the fracture already dried up and thinned out more than it should be: then know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it. So bind him with warm water all over the whole place where you loosed it, and let that be for three days altogether, and ease the constriction a little.
By this operation therefore nourishment flows to the member, and it is healed quickly.
But that which foolish restorers do from the fracture of a member by twisting it into another place when it is not restored first as it should be and is restored according to the curvature, is an error from their operation and great fear: and if it were straight they would have said so in their books and operated with it.
And I nowhere saw any mark of theirs being done like that at all, and it is better not to do it.
Concerning the making of an incision in the head.
There are many species of fractures and their forms are numerous; and their causes are diverse.
For a fracture occurs from a blow with a sword: and the blow removes the bone entirely as far as it reaches to the siphac, which is under the bone, just as an axe does in wood; and because of this it is called axial fracture.
Or the sword cuts into something of the bone and cuts its surface but does not penetrate to the last part of it; and this kind of fracture is called kalaan, that is, a splitting.
And it is a wound either of two fractures, large or small.
And there is a fracture which occurs through crushing or bruising; and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall upon a stone, or things similar to these.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which has almost reached the periosteum, which is under the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone; and it is a wound of these two fractures, either large or small.
And there is a fracture which is hidden in the bone in subtlety of hair; and it is a small split, and because of this it is called this kind of fracture capillary.
And from these there is a fracture which occurs from a fall or a blow with a stone and things similar to these, which make a plate of bone enter inside, and it forms a concavity in the place; just as happens with bronze vessels when they are struck and part of them enters inside.
And this indeed happens very much in the heads of humid bones, such as the skulls of children.
And all these kinds of fractures are forced and separated; and I have finished with the reminder of that whole thing in its own place.
And we know all these kinds of fractures by inspection over them, and inquiry with strings, and removal of the corrupted flesh that is over them.
The capillary species is known by this, that it is disclosed over the bone and scraped away, and smeared over it with wax: for indeed a fracture appears black.
However, in the cure of a fracture, consider first the accidents of the patient; then if you see from these accidents that they signify something manifest over fear, such as vomiting of bile, and diarrhea, and loss of intellect, and separation of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and protrusion of eyes, and redness of them, and similar things from accidents in many conditions, without a doubt it is not cured: and if you see that the accidents do not trouble you, and hope for healing: then begin its cure.
Which is this, if he comes to you wounded on being wounded: and it is in the dead of winter, then you must strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day according to every condition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest what is under the bone from a cloth becomes corrupted and those accidents occur which we have narrated.
Which if the bone fracture has already come to a cloth touching the brain, and is with smallness and adhesion: then you must cut out the broken and worn part, according to what I tell you.
And it is as if you were to rasp the head of the wounded person: and uncover over the bone in whatever manner is possible for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light over the patient.
Which if there occurs to you on detecting the bone a flow of blood, or a warm suppurating spot: then apply to it whatever is necessary. And you should fill the place with cloths steeped in wine and rose oil: and cause the wound to be quiet until the swelling is stilled, and you are secure from the flow of blood. Then begin with the cure of a bone and its removal.
And it is done according to one or two methods.
The first method indeed is, that you cut the bone with a sharp-edged instrument called an "incisorium", and this is its shape.
Then give another incisorium, set somewhat wider than the first incisors, and this is its shape.
Then give also another incisorium, yet even wider than the second.
And the second method is, that you have a number of incisors of different kinds with some wider than others and some shorter than others, and having their extremities very sharp, and being made of iron or bronze: and use them easily in striking upon the bone so as not to shake the head and damage it.
But if the bone is hard and strong then it is necessary to bore into its circumference before you give incisors with Terebres that are called shallow Terebres: and they are not so named unless because they do not pass beyond the term of the bony part to what lies behind it; therefore, since the Terebre has a rounded extremity above which is under the sharp point, like its edge, and a small circle prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting for you to take a number of these Terebres, each one suiting the thickness of the bone, until there is present with you one Terebre for every part of the skull: and the sharpness of its pointed extremity should be in length and shortness according to the thickness of that part of the skull.
And this is the shape of three kinds of Terebres or Trephines.
The quality of piercing around a broken bone is such: that you place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know the bone has been pierced. Then change the drill to another place and insert what is between all the holes in size of a finger or about that.
Then cut with a saw what is between all the holes from the bone; and make it finer than you can on the end of it because of its thinness, as we said, until you root out the bone either by hand or with some other tool which you have prepared for this: such as forceps and fine pincers.
And it is necessary that you beware of all caution lest the drill or saw touch anything from a piece of wood.
When therefore you have gone around the bone perforating and it has been separated from the wood, if it was continuous with it and you have extracted it, then you must rasp and make equal the extremity of what remains in the bone with another similar sawing instrument. However, it should be thin and finer than other saws.
And if something remains from small bones and you are striving then take it with facility along with what is at your hand from instruments. Then care for the wound afterwards with liniments and ointments which we mentioned.
And another mode of the operation is easy and far removed from fear which Galen said and praised with great praise and this is his saying. It is necessary for you at first to begin uncovering the part of the bone from the place in which the fracture is more violent and manifest: until when you have uncovered that part and placed under it the extremity of this lens-shaped saw whose shape is this.
And the part of the lens-shaped saw does not cut anything smooth; and the sharp point of it running along its two sides to a length as you see: so that the part of the lens-shaped saw is leaning against the wood with its pointed face striking against the bone.
Then strike with a hammer over the incisor bone from one side until you easily cut through the entire bone as it turns over: and be sure to use a cloth so that what you fear may not happen does not occur.
And if the physician were not more foolish than men and more ignorant of it, nor sleeping, then if something of the bone remained attached from a cloth in some places, he would cut it away with the edge of the incisor shell itself, and free it with ease. For indeed it is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate up to the cloth, and what is being cut away from the bone is its surface, and there remain in it roughnesses and fine scratches: then it is necessary that you rasp that roughness, and root out those scratches with fine rasps of which you have prepared a number of different quantities, so that it may be possible for you to apply them in every place more suitable and correct for them, according to what the operation leads you, and the fractured bone itself, and its shape. And it is necessary that you administer to yourself with a kind of rasp in your operation, by which at first you rasp the bone, more widely than those small rasps. Then use one after another even finer than that.
And it is necessary that you administer to yourself with a kind of rasp in your operation, by which at first you rasp the bone, more widely than those small rasps. Then use one after another even finer than that. And do not cease to do this in succession until you reach the point of administering something finer and subtler than all of them.
And in each of the small remaining cracks and fine fractures, it is necessary that you administer care, according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a thing that is not hidden from everyone who has any study or zeal for this art, and stood over what we wrote and showed in great fractures.
But if the cloth that is detected is retained when you remove the bone: then it is necessary for you to take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth, doubled or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil. And place it on the first cloth. Do this as easily as you can so that it does not weigh heavily upon the abscess.
Then apply over it a broad bandage, and do not tighten it, unless by as much as is sufficient to hold the wound; and leave it with this treatment for one day or two days, until you are sure of the warmth of the abscess. Then dissolve it and apply after that medicines with which there is excessive dryness: such as lily roots, and the flour of a plant, and powdered galbanum, and aristolochia, and similar things to these. And this is how you should make from these medicines a powder, which shall be sprinkled over the wound like the dry ones.
And universally apply to it all medicine of a property that is such as to clean and not irritate. And take care according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; nor let there be in it the dirt of ointment or its filth.
And take care according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; nor let there be in it the dirt of ointment or its filth. And do not let the pus accumulate in it at all; for when the pus accumulates on the cloth of the brain, it corrupts and festers it, and a great evil befalls the sick person after that. And it also happens in the head abscess, with the mouth being cleaned from it, especially when its cure is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore consider then, if evils befall the sick person that we have said would happen, know surely that it is noxious beyond doubt.
And if blackness does not occur except from the medicine that is put on it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine to make that blackness: then you must take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and mix with them a cloth. Then place it over the abscess: afterwards treat it with remedies and cure-all devices that are suitable, until it heals.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except for two of its upper parts together, or one of them, because it consists of two bones: since the lower part of it is cartilaginous, it does not break and an injury to it occurs only by bruising, twisting, and deformation.
If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must put a little finger into the nostril and equalize that fracture with your index finger and thumb outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape and this is done artfully and easily. And beware lest there occur through your operation that excessive pain in it.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and you cannot reach it with your finger: then it must be equalized with the end of a small wooden stick.
And if indeed the fracture is in both parts, then do the same thing and proceed with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after seven or ten days at rest from the inflammation.
Then insert into the extremity of the nose a linen strip from flaxen cloth, if the fracture is in one part: or insert two strips if the fracture is in both parts: and let the thickness of the linen be such that it fills the nostril.
And some ancient restorers have said that linens should be steeped in butter and changed every day. That however does not seem to me, rather it is necessary for the linen to be steeped in egg whites, mixed with mill dust. Then release the linen until the bone has firmed up and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes it intervenes on the nose with a feather of goose down, after which is wrapped over it a soft cloth: and this happens, that it holds the break of the nose more firmly, and so the sick person is not prevented from breathing.
And this thing is not necessary. If you wish, do it; and if you wish, make a licina.
If the nose happens to break again while you are treating a hot abscess, anoint the nose with cerot or with a small amount of cotongue infused in rose oil, or a moderate amount from dragon's blood.
But if a hot abscess does not happen, then it is necessary to make an ointment of the same with sesame flour and powdered frankincense made with the white of an egg. Then place a soft poultice over it, and do not tie the nose at all.
But if the bones of the nose are broken in a small fracture, or crushed, then it is necessary to split over them and remove them with instruments which are suited to them. Then sew the incision and care for it with that which fleshes and consolidates itself from ointments or plasters suitable to it.
But if a wound occurs between the nose, then it is necessary to care for it with licines and administer a lead tube until it heals.
Of the restoration of the lower jawbone, when it is broken.
When the lower jawbone is broken and its fracture is not with a wound: then look if it is a break of it outside only, and does not break into two and bend to the inside: then knowledge of it is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is in the right part of it, you must insert the index finger of your left hand into the infirm bone: similarly if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then insert the index finger of your right hand: and push with it the prominence of the fracture backward with facility to the outside with your other hand from the inner part of the bone carefully, and with it make it even.
If the fracture of the jawbone is already separated into two parts, then you should apply extension from both sides, according to straightness, until it becomes possible to equalize it.
But if there is already movement or disruption of the teeth, then bind them with what you hope will remain together with a thread of gold, silver, or linen. Then place over the broken jaw a cauterized [piece of] wood. Then place over it a doubled cloth and on top of the cloth a large splint made neatly or a clog skin piece equal to the length of the jawbone.
Then bind it from above according to the ligature that is prepared for it and suits its application until it does not destroy [the bone]; and command the patient to be in calmness and quietness, and place his food as soft drinks.
But if you think that already something is being altered in shape by some means, then hasten and loosen it on the third day. Then straighten out what was altered from it and apply to it a poultice of mill dust with egg white or with sumac flour after you have removed the wood splint, and place soft wool on top of the poultice.
Therefore while that attached poultice remains over it and the disposition of the bone does not change, let it go so that you do not untie it until it is healed or the fracture is bound. For indeed this fracture is often bound for three weeks many times.
And if meanwhile a warm suppurative swelling occurs, then administer to him that which we have said many times for his sedation until the swelling is removed.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider [the treatment]. And if already fragments or shreds are separated from the bone, then be careful in this and remove those shreds with that which is suitable for their removal by instruments.
If the wound opening is tightened, then enlarge it with a phlebotome according to the quantity of your need.
Then when you have removed the stitches, and nothing remains of them, or then if the wound opening is large: and if not, put over it plasters that suit it, and they will fill it in until it heals.
On the restoration of a fractured clavicle.
Indeed the clavicle is most often broken from the front part of the shoulder and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it either breaks and separates into two, apart from which the stitches occur in it: and it is easier to restore it.
Or so that happens in bone stitches: and it is more difficult to restore it.
Or so that it is a fracture with an open wound.
And the operation in it when the fracture is without a wound is, that you make two attendants present, so that one of them holds the aid that follows the fractured clavicle, and another extends the neck towards the side.
Then straighten the fracture with your fingers until it becomes its proper shape, according to what is needed; and let there not be in it prominence or concavity.
But if you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place under the patient's shoulders a ball of cloth or wool: and let its magnitude be according to the quantity of your necessity: and extend, and raise the clavicle, and bind the ball with your hand until it straightens the fracture, as is proper.
But if you cannot pull the end of the clavicle outwards because it has reached depth: then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back over his own shoulders: and put under his arm a pillow of medium size in magnitude, and have the attendant press his shoulder downwards until the bone of the clavicle that is in depth is raised upwards: and then straighten the fracture and align it with your fingers.
If however you feel a stone from the hernia and it moves: then it is necessary that you cut above it, and draw out the stone with ease.
If however it is retained in the bone: then cut with skill in the incision of it with one of the saws which you prepared for this purpose, after you have placed under the hernia instrument that keeps the flesh from being lacerated; and the instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its shape.
It resembles a snail shell, in which there is no concavity.
And its width should be according to that by which you are in need of it, from the magnitude of the bone and its smallness. Its length, however, is also as much as possible for you to do with the operation.
And it should have two ends, as you see them; and one end should be broad, and the other narrow.
If however the disruption of the wound which you cut when you extracted the bone stone is broad, and you secure it from a hot gangrene: then stitch together the two edges of the wound with suture.
And if the disruption is small or you fear a hot gangrene: then fill the wound with cloths and dust according to the size of the cut wound.
Which if a hot gangrene happens, then pour cloth into rose oil, and vinegar, and wine, and place over it.
The stiffness of the bone when it is without a wound and without cutting is, as you apply over the bone an ointment made from mill flour with egg white. And place a warm poultice over it. Then place a sphere under the splint of it, if you need to use one. Then take a hemp rope, that is, the circle which the Saracens hold, which is very long; and let its width be the breadth of one's hand, or about that. Then place a small doubled cloth over the swelling and apply a plaster. Then take a small splint from thin wood, of three finger's breadth in width, and similarly in length. Then wrap it around with cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the splint into place over the spot where the bleeding falls upon the fracture and the place. Then place the pad over the fracture as it is folded, and wrap it around his neck and under his healthy shoulder and under his ailing shoulder: and bring it back over all of it, and as you see that the bandage holds the fracture in its grip: and it is this, which is not hidden from you, and whole, so that the splint should not be removed from above the broken bone. And because of this, you must inspect the ailing person every day. Whenever therefore the bandage loosens and you see that the splint is already being removed: then correct it, and tighten the bandage.
Then place the patient's back on a pillow and put under his shoulder while he sleeps a small pillow at night, so that with him may be lifted up his support from beside himself. The fracture of the arm therefore is lifted by elevation of the shoulder.
Or bind his arm to his own neck: and do not loosen the bandage unless an accident happens in place of a boil or from an abscess until twelve days.
Then renew the plaster, if you see that his face turns to it. And add to the bandage, and let him go until he is restored and has healed.
And the fracture of the arm is indeed tightened and strengthened for the most part within twenty-eight days, and sometimes it happens in some men within a shorter time.
Of the restoration of the fractured Spoon.
The spatula is rarely broken and is used in a wide area, and it does not break except for its edges.
When therefore it breaks from a wide area and breaks in the middle of it, and is not known except by touch: then according to the figure of the break, try to prepare its repair. And reduce it back over its natural shape in every way possible with your mind, which is within your power.
Then place powdered millstone with the white of an egg, and gentle starch, and place a small amount on top from doubled cloth. Then place over it a broad splint made from thin board according to the size of the spatula or somewhat larger than it.
But if there is a concavity under the splint in some part of the spatula, then equalize it with gentle starch until the splint descends according to equality.
Then bind it from above with linen threads long and decent constriction, and the firmness of the splint, until it is not removed from its place.
And inspect the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage loosens, bind it again, and straighten the splint if it becomes dislodged from its place, and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
And indeed the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days.
When therefore this number is completed, then loosen the bandage and you will be safe. For it is of bones whose disunion is not to be feared, nor their dissolution.
But if a splinter proceeds from the bone and pierces under the skin, then cut above it and remove it. And do as we said about a broken wing from septicating an abscess of hot pus, if anything happens from that.
On the treatment of a broken chest.
The chest sometimes breaks in its middle part, and it is rarely encountered. Its extremities are often broken and bruised from falls on them.
When its middle breaks downwards and a severe pain occurs to him, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps he vomits blood, and the concavity is shown in the broken bone, which does not remain hidden from sense. Its restoration is, that the weak person be laid on his back: and place soft cushions between his shoulders.
Then press his shoulders and bring the ribs together from both sides with his hands: and make them smooth in balance with each other, as much as possible that it is fitting, until the form of the bone returns, as it should.
Then place on top of him a poultice and plaster, and place above that an astel from a thin board of willow or hazelnut, or something similar to it in lightness, after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then smooth it out by binding it over the broken bone, so that it is not moved; and go with a bandage according to its roundness to the back several times, and bind it tight with a suitable knot.
Then consider the bandage at every hour, and whenever it becomes soft, bind it; and if necessity prompts to its removal because of itching, or corrosion which occurs in the place, or pain, or swelling: then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the poultice, and correct what has occurred with the method of its cure.
Then replace the plaster, if you see it is necessary for that; and apply a tight bandage to him until he is healed.
On the treatment of Ribs, when they are broken.
Know that a fractured rib does not occur except in the places which follow the back and are from the extremities of them from the anterior part. And bruising does not happen to them, unless because they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from the sense during an investigation with fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way that you equal the fracture with fingers according to what is possible until it equals the figure, as it should. Then apply poultices and bind the fractured bone with a splint if it needs that.
And if the rib fracture is inclined towards the inside: then a sick and severe pain occurs, and a puncture, just like that which occurs to one who has pleurisy: because the bone pierces the membrane, and also difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood occurs: and this is difficult to cure.
And now the ancients have been ingenious in it with many devices: and among them are those who say, that you put foods of the infirm which generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflamed, and extends, and pushes the fracture to the outside.
We however detest, that it not be a cause of speed in making a warm abscess, if it does not occur. But if it has already occurred, then you add to it.
And some of them said: a poultice should be placed on the place, then it should be sucked with strength, and it is similar in reasoning. However, there is fear that a poultice might attract excess humors to the place because of weakness of disposition.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool that has already been soaked in warm oil, and that lint be placed between the ribs, until it is filled: so that there may be a bandage equal when you wind it around according to its roundness.
Then let the ailing person be cured with treatment through expectoration by means of food and medicine.
But if some grievous thing oppresses the ailing person, which they cannot bear, and their mouth is pained by an ulcerating puncture, and we fear for them: then it behooves us to cut open above the place, and uncover the broken rib. Then let us lay over it an instrument that preserves stitches, of which mention was made beforehand: and let us cut the mouth with ease, and cut out the ulcer itself.
Then let us bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large with a suture: and let us treat it with plasters until it heals.
But if a hot pustule should occur meanwhile, then quickly, and pour powdered ashes into rose oil, and place it over the place: and let the ailing person be cured with what suits a pustule.
Meanwhile also a bandage will be stretched over the side above which it sleeps, until it heals.
Chapter On The Restoration of a Fracture of the Vertebra of the Back and Neck.
Indeed the bones of the neck sometimes come to be fractured, and rarely a chafing occurs: and similarly also with the vertebrae of the back. When therefore it happens to anyone, and you wish to know whether it will heal or not heal: then feel. For if you see their hands already softened and stiffened, and dead: and they cannot move them, nor stretch them out, nor constrict them: and when you constrict them with your fingers, and prick them with a needle, he does not feel it, and does not feel pain in them: then know that it is not healing, and in many dispositions is mortal.
But if he moves them, and feels constriction with your fingers and pain from a prick: then know that the marrow of the bone is saved, and that the ailing person will be healed with treatment.
If a similar condition should occur on the spine and you wish to know whether it can be cured or not, then examine his feet. If you see that they have been softened and that there occurs in them what occurs in the hands, and when he lies on his back, flatulence and vomiting occur without will; and when he is laid on his stomach, flatulence occurs without will; and when he is laid on his abdomen and wishes to urinate but cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore do not labor in its cure.
But if indeed nothing of that sort occurs to him, the condition is lighter.
And its cure is, as for the inflammation of a boil, to apply a warm poultice to the spine; thus, placing on the spine pounded rose oil alone, or with eggs that are well cooked.
Place over it several times a day the warm poultice until the hot boil is satiated; then place on the spot one of those plasters that are comforting, drying, and tie it on with a bandage: and command the sick person to use quietness and tranquility. And let him not sleep on the part where he finds pain until it is healed.
And if it occurs due to the bruising of a vertebra or something that has already separated from it, then it is necessary to make an incision on the skin and remove it. Then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture. Then care for him with some ointment from unguents until he heals.
If however the last vertebra of the spine is broken and is at the end of the tail: then it is necessary to insert the finger of the left hand into the anus, and with the other hand, straighten the broken bone as much as possible, and make a second adjustment.
Then place over it [the instrument], and remove it; and care for the wound with the treatment which preceded, until it heals.
Of the restoration of an eye.
Chapter 11.
The bones of the eyes are rarely broken. But if they are broken, then the fracture is not unless there is comminution of their ends; and they split lengthwise and incline to the interior: and an aching pain occurs in the place, and a spot: and the leg that breaks becomes numb.
And indeed its restoration is that you stretch out your hand over it until you stand above the fracture so as to see what shape it has.
But if the fracture is only in its ends, then make it even with the fracture according to what you prepare for yourself from setting, until it is like its natural shape.
But if the fracture is lengthwise, or already inclines to the interior; then make the patient lie on his stomach until you prepare for yourself its restoration of that fracture. Therefore when you have made it even, place over it a poultice; then put over it a splint of wood or of skin, and bind tightly over where you do not fear the change of the fracture, nor the removal of the splint.
And make the concavity even with it and that which fills it, until it takes on the binding according to equality; and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side.
But if a hot abscess should happen to him, then cease from stretching it and its restoration, until the hot abscess settles; and place over it that which settles it, according to what came before, then return to its restoration; and bind it as is fitting.
If however it happens that a piece of bone is detached or comminuted, extract it.
On the restoration of fractures of the limbs.
The Adiutorium is that which is between the elbow and the head, a spatula.
Therefore if it is fractured, then its restoration is according to one of two manners.
One of them is: that you take a piece of wood flat and of middle thickness, in the shape which follows.
And two bands are tied to both ends.
Then it is suspended from a raised place, and the patient sits on a seat. Then he throws his fractured arm over the wood, until it reaches its elbow joint, where a notch is cut in the middle of the wood.
Then something heavy is suspended above it, so that the weight will stretch out the arm downward. Then the doctor equalizes the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that the patient lies on his back over his own neck and hang his hand from his own neck with a band. Then order two servants to hold one of them by the parts above the fracture with their hands and have the other hold below it and each stretch as far as his own.
And if you wish the extension to be stronger, then tie one band below the fracture and another above it with another band, and have each of the two servants stretch as far apart as they can.
If the fracture is near the end of the shoulder, then it is necessary to place one band under the elbow joint and another under the fracture towards the wrist.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is necessary to place a band over that place and over the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease without effort until when the fracture is equal as it should be and good treatment is applied to it, then tie it if no hot abscess occurs.
If a hot abscess occurs, then leave the bandage until the seventh day. And put over it a cloth that has been cut and soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the abscess becomes quiet; then bind it. And the way of binding it is, as when you apply an ointment to a fracture.
Then put an inflation from a new cloth over the ointment. Then draw the arm over the assistance and place his hand open on his shoulder.
And put a cloth and bind over the assistance of the arm, so that the arm may stand in the place of joints; if it does not hinder you from doing anything or something is altered on your body from a broken bone.
But if you fear that something is altered on your body from a broken bone, then use splints; and it is as when you place over the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And place between all the splint a breadth of a finger; and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers from each part.
Then bind over the splints with the bandage which I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is as if your bandage were tighter on the place of the fracture. And as much as the fracture extends, the bandage should be looser.
If therefore you see the state of the splints and bandage, as we said, in the hour when you restore the member immediately, then do it; and if you fear a hot abscess, then leave the bandage and splints until the seventh day, as we said.
Then look at the ligature in all three days, lest there occur itching, or inflation, or that food should not reach the member because of the disposition of excess tightness of the bandage. Correct therefore that whole thing according to what we said.
If indeed it is above trust, so that nothing comes from it: then do not separate the ligature, unless after three days or more.
And let the sleep of the sick person be on his back, and his hands on his belly: and place under him a bolster full of wool evenly.
And consider at every hour of night or day, lest the figure of the broken member be loosed, or the ligament be softened. Therefore correct that whole thing with your skill.
And give the food to the sick person according to the order we have mentioned, so that the food is subtle at first until he begins to chew well: then it is necessary that you thicken his food.
For it is customary for the assistant and the leg to be set so that they are strong in forty days: then therefore it is necessary that it be released, and a bath be administered, and it be treated with ointments which correct that.
But if the fracture is foul and crushed: then you will not separate from it the ligament and splinters until fifty days, and even until two months.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two humerus.
One of which is small, and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which is placed below the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps therefore only the larger humerus breaks, or the smaller one, and perhaps both break together.
When therefore the small upper humerus breaks, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the lower humerus breaks, it is a bad fracture, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse still, when both bones break together.
If therefore the bone that is fractured is a femur a little too high up, then it suits the physician for its restoration, to place a small splint with ease, until it fits.
If however the femur that is fractured is large one: then it is necessary to place a stronger splint.
And it is necessary to place the shape of the hand on its restoration, and its splint extended over a cushion. And let the thumb of the hand be above all the fingers higher, and let the lower joint of all the fingers, or the rest, be so; and let the weak person sit in a square on itself, and let the cushion be before him, or in direct line with him, in height, so that the weak person does not incur labor.
Then the assistant should stretch the arm from the lower part, either by hand or with a bandage. And another assistant should stretch similarly from above.
Then the physician should straighten the bone until he reduces it to its better shape as much as possible.
Which if there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then try to reduce all fragments to their place with your strength.
If however there appears a separated splinter and it pierces the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration: then take it out from above, and remove it according to the method which we mentioned among those that were previously said.
If however the fracture is with a wound, I have already done for that singular chapter, so receive its treatment from there.
Which if it happens at the beginning of your restoration a warm abscess forms, then mix linen with cerote made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be in the middle between thickness and thinness: and bind the linen tightly on it with a subtle bandage, until when the abscess is pacified; then remove the cerote, and place a prepared poultice made from mill dust with egg white. Then place splints, and let the splint placed over the fracture itself be somewhat wider and stronger.
And know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most dispositions; whether the fracture be in one forearm or in both forearms together.
Then place your bandage over the place of the fracture more tightly and severely, and somewhat more to the higher or lower part of it: or put a softer bandage than it slightly, according to what was said at the beginning of this chapter.
And let the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture be soft, moist ones; and not hard, rough ones. And let the thread with which it is tied be linen of its own kind, medium between fine and thick, as we have mentioned.
And observe the member and the ligament after some days. But if anything happens that requires correction, such as itching occurring in the member: then you must, anoint the member with warmed water until that itching ceases, and leave the member not constricted until it ceases; thereafter repeat the bandaging.
But if the bandage is already softened and the bone removed and similar things have happened: then correct that whole thing with your skill, and observe again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the member because of excessive bandaging, then it is necessary to loosen it somewhat and leave it for some days until nourishment flows back to it; then bind it.
But if none of the things we mentioned happen to the patient, then it is not necessary for him to be released until after twenty days, or about that.
Then the hand of the sick person shall be suspended from his neck. And let his neck be even and be guarded with his strength against shaken movements. And make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture is restored in thirty days, or possibly in thirty-two days; and perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days. The whole thing is according to the dispositions of the humors and the dispositions of vitality.
Concerning the restoration of fractures of the hand.
Know that a fracture rarely occurs in the wrist and knuckles of the fingers. And it does not occur to him unless there is much rubbing against it.
When therefore a fracture or rubbing of the sole occurs, then it is necessary for the sick person to be seated in an equal chair: and before him should be a seat. Then place his hand over it stretched out.
Then let the servant stretch out the broken bones and let the doctor shape them until they are joined together with a good conjunction.
Then it is necessary for him to place a poultice and a compress, if a warm aposteme does not occur. Then place a bandage over it from above according to the size of the place: and you have already wrapped it in a linen cloth.
But if the fracture is near the lower part around the belly of the foot, then make a similar sphere out of cloth and order the sick person to bend over it with his fractured foot: afterwards let it be bound with a long cloth.
And the bandage should be of leather in which there is softness, so that the skin may adhere to the body of the foot; and bind it as is necessary.
But if the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary to place a bandage over from above and another bandage from below on the foot; and let the hand be straight. Then place a splint, as the hand is revolved; and extend between the fingers with a ligament.
If there should happen a fracture of any of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it will be set straight according to what is necessary. Then let a bandage be applied with the sole of the foot; and if it is an arm, place on it a splint straight, small so that the fracture may be elevated and not be moved.
But if the fracture is of the remaining fingers, such as the middle, and index, or ring, and little finger, then let it be set straight and bound with the sound finger that follows it; or all should be bound according to their connection; and it is better. Or place over it a small splint, as we said of the thumb.
And consider in your treatment and after the aforesaid arrangement you will apply hot fomentations; and place against it what is needed when something happens to it, according to how its story is repeated.
On the restoration of the fracture of the hip joint.
The bone of the hip joint is often broken and becomes known to sensation because it turns to the inner and back part.
And its restoration is done in this way, that a bandage is applied above the fracture and another bandage below the fracture. And the patient should be stretched out on his back.
Then let every bandage that is applied to him be extended to the other side according to equality; and this when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
But if it is a fracture near the root of the hip joint, then let the bandage be to the side of the groin so that the extension falls upwards and another bandage below the fracture.
And similarly if it is a fracture near the knee, then let the bandage be near the knee so that the extension falls downwards.
Then the physician should set the bone with both of his hands until he reduces it according to the similarity of its natural figure and join the bones together with a good connection.
Then it is necessary, that you put on a poultice and a bandage, if an abscess does not occur in the limb. But if it happens that an abscess occurs in the limb: then leave it for a few days until the warm abscess subsides, and then return to your treatment.
And the bandage of it should be such. It is necessary that you wrap something strong, such as a cloth or a bandage, over the broken limb, and double it back on itself two or three times, and let excess remain. Then wrap the leg so that the heel reaches down to the ankle.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee to the lower parts, so that the ends of the thread come from the upper part of both parts. Then wrap over the leg and thigh whatever excess comes out from the bandage.
Then place over the thigh at the place of the fracture small splints, and place one of them over the shinbone.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths to equalize the bandage.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle over the place of the fracture three or four windings. And as much as you extend the bandage with ligatures from the place of the fracture, let your bandage be less tight and softer, and gentler.
Then turn to the two ends of the thread which you inserted between the thigh and leg. So bind with them all three splints that are on top. Then go back with the two ends of the thread to the lower parts until you reach the heel of the foot. And with both, tie also the ends of the splints from the other part, so that the bandage is not removed from its place.
Then leave the bandage as it is, so that it does not cause a member to be corroded, nor an abscess, nor swelling, and things like these. If something happens with him. Therefore apply a dressing to it and correct that which has happened from it all over again, just as we have said many times.
If however a splinter of bone is in the bone that pierces: then it must be equalized by you, if it is possible for you. And if not, find something over it and remove that which pierces, and care for him to whom the previous incision was made, until he heals.
And when this fracture of the hip occurs again, besides the splints being added to him, as we said in the aid and arm.
However, in its restoration when thus broken, lameness does not occur in the patient. And if it is restored alone, besides a leg being applied to him, then it is necessary for him whose it is, to be lame forever.
And know that the hip gets inflamed after fifty days, or is increased a little, or diminished a little; all this is according to the diversity of temperaments and other dispositions.
On the restoration of a fractured patella of the knee.
Know that a fractured patella of the knee occurs rarely, but attrition occurs to it many times.
If however a fracture occurs to it, then only an opening or a cleft or a hole can occur in its parts. And it is with an injury and without an injury. And a dressing is applied to it all over with feeling.
And its restoration is such that what has been disrupted will be equalized with its parts using the fingers, until it is gathered and joined as possible according to equality and facility, and skill.
Then apply a plaster made from sesame flour or mill flour with egg white, and place over it a round splint if you need one, and bind it with suitable bandages on top.
Then consider all the arrangements which we have narrated in other fractures, such as suppurating empyema and similar ones; so, as to oppose every affliction with what is suitable for it, until it is healed.
About the restoration of a fractured leg.
Know that there are two bones in the leg, one thick and named by the name of the leg, and the other subtle and named Fibula.
And it happens to both types of fractures that happen to the two bones of the arm: and because of this, its restoration is done similarly to the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
Which if the two bones are broken at the same time, the leg turns to all parts.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg turns forward.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find it below: and it is one of those that are not hidden from you.
Then apply extension, equability, and the binding of the splints according to what is equal.
However it is necessary, if the fracture of the leg is a foul one, having many swellings: that there be less extension, and a milder alleviation by you.
And indeed in the leg there is something like an operation on the arm: and it is, that when you equal the splints, and complete all your operation, then take two strips of pine wood, which is administered in the making of sundials that are put under tables: and they are made from the palm of a spatula: and choose among them those whose thickness is small, nor are they minute: and their length should be according to the length of the leg from the knee down.
Then wind around each strip two wrappings according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side, and the other on the other side: and they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind two ligatures in three places from both ends and the middle. For when stricture is prevented, the urethra turns to the right and left, and stands in good position.
And now indeed a cradle made of wood should be administered according to the length of the leg, and the leg should be placed in it so that it may be preserved from movement.
And indeed it is most necessary to do this when there is a fracture along with the wound itself properly.
Then observe the leg every day and strive with utmost care to prevent it from becoming inflamed, swollen or suffering any other affliction. So if something of this sort happens, then apply to it whatever is necessary until it heals, if God so wills.
Of the fracture of bones of the foot and fingers.
Indeed a fracture does not occur in the heel completely.
Indeed a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot and fingers at times, and even a little fracture occurs to them; and it does not occur to them unless there is crushing in many dispositions.
But if a fracture occurs to the bones of the foot and you see those bones rising up on top of each other altogether, then let the patient put his foot on the prepared ground as one walking.
Then stand you and place your foot on what is raised from those bones; afterwards press or tread upon it; and equalize it until it returns to its places.
Then place a poultice and a compress on top of it; and place under the foot of the patient a small board with two flat heads.
Then bind it around with the bandage suitable for constriction, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other things which it needs.
When therefore three days or four have passed by from this point, then loosen the bandage. For you will find bones that are broken or fractured, or dislocated. So the operation for them is as you see.
But if some fingers are broken, then restore them and make them even as I told you about restoring the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint on your finger with the astel as long as the finger and a little wider: then place this board under the foot that I told you about, and tie it with a suitable string.
But if what is broken is made of two or three bones, or more, then place a splint as long as the finger on top of all the fingers, wrapped in linen cloth: and tie the board to the lower foot; and let it stand over one end of the board outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds well in place.
And it is fitting for you to remember not to forget all that I have said to you about the other fractures from accidents as we mentioned, and oppose every accident with what is needed.
Of the fracture of a woman's vulva, and of the breastbone of a man, and of the penis of a man.
When the vulva of a woman is broken, then make her sit up straight. Then lean her back a little to the part of her own back and hold it in place.
Then the midwife should fill the vulva with cotton until it is filled and it should be like a sphere inside the vulva.
Then the woman is shaken, and her back is lifted slightly. For that cotton will come out until it is before the vulva as a sphere, and the broken bone will return.
Then put a poultice on her back. And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton easily, then let her do so; and replace it afterwards according to the manner in which you first inserted it, then return her to her own poultice.
He should make it seven days, or about that time, for indeed the jaw itself is restored.
And if you wish, take the bladder of a sheep, and tie a reed tube over its orifice, and insert the whole bladder into its vulva. Then blow through the tube with force, until the bladder is inflated inside the vulva, for indeed the fracture returns.
Then it will be filled with fat, and stand for a few days, as we have said, until it heals.
And when the bone of the pectoral muscle or woman is broken, then administer it for its restoration and that which we have said about the bones of the shoulder.
And the rectum is not concealed in these nearby fractures which are close together, especially for one who has some study or use.
And understand my book very well, for indeed the fracture itself signifies to you in many arrangements a straight way in its restoration and tightening of itself: therefore understand.
But in the rod of a man when it is broken, take the gullet of a goose: and insert the rod into it. Then put over it a bandage from cloth, and be wrapped up, and let go for three days, or about those, and he will heal, if God wills.
Concerning the restoration of fractures of bones when there is also a wound.
It is fitting for him to whom a fracture occurs with a wound, especially if it is great, such as the hip bone or assistant bone or similar to that, to speed and to let blood immediately: if the conditions of letting blood are attested to you, as we have previously mentioned.
But if the wound lets out blood, then you must hasten to its excision, so that you powder ground zeek over it, if another is not present for you.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that very same day; and do not postpone it if no suppuration occurs.
If, however, a warm suppurating lesion occurs, then abandon the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the suppuration subsides. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause bad things to happen to it.
But if the fractured bone is prominent above the skin and visible: then you must endeavor to reduce it, and straighten it out with your hands with ease and a little extension.
But if its extension and alignment by your hands is not prepared: then reduce it with this instrument. And the instrument is made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the size of the wound. And because of that the physician must take from them three or four according to the quantity as he needs it for that sake of cure in every kind of fracture.
And it should be rounded, and there should be a small thickness in it, so that it does not double back upon itself under compression at the time of the operation: and it should have an acute end, with which there is a edge on its extremities. And its upper part should be to the thickness from its middle up to the lower parts.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation that the acute end of it be curved over the extremity of the prominent bone: and push it with one force until when the bone returns and becomes straightened with some equality.
Therefore, strive to straighten the ends of the fracture mutually.
But if the ends of the fractured bone are fine and do not receive it with good acceptance, then you must cut the end of that bone until the instrument can have power over it.
If you truly cannot reduce them with what we have described entirely, then cut into it with the instrument that suits it from those which we mentioned: or saw it with any saw that is possible for you.
Then smooth out what remains on the bone from roughness and small scabs.
Therefore when the bone is reduced and the sick person after reduction finds a severe pain hurting him, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
So do that thing. For you will be giving great aid to the sick person, when your restoration which you are doing for the bone is completed.
Then immerse a cloth in black wine of vinegar. And especially if it be in summer. And do not place over the wound a cloth that is greasy, nor anything in which oil is, so that it will not cause to happen in itself decay and corruption.
Then administer theriac at the hour of completion of your restoration of the bone. And leave the found wound thus, so that you cut with scissors a hole in the bandages according to the size of the wound.
And beware with all care lest you close the wound with the fracture. For many times foolish doctors have done this and caused to happen over their sick patients either death, or corruption, or gangrene, that is, putrefaction. And let your stitch be soft, gentle, and different from the stitches of other fractures.
For if the wound is bad or a great wound and you fear over it some evil accidents that we have narrated, and you find pain in the place suspended: then it is not necessary to put theriac on it. And make bandages from hard cloths over the place of the theriac and tie them on it.
When however it is a day or two after and you see the wound beginning to suppurate, as it were being generated with pus: then take off from above that cloth which you placed over it with wine. Then administer linseed and ointments with which we are accustomed to heal wounds, as the unguent of four remedies, and similar things.
And it is fitting for you to untie the bandage. And consider the wound every morning and evening until it becomes firm and heals.
And it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the pus may flow from it downward with ease.
But if many days pass over the wound and it does not become firm, nor is the pus shed from it: then know that there are small splinters of bone. Therefore it is necessary to examine the wound with a probe. As many as are separated from them, remove them and take out those things. And what are not separated from them and pierce the member, and cause pain to occur, try to cut them off and remove them in any way that is possible for you.
But if there occurs to the wound a gangrene or ecchymosis, that is an ulceration, or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to apply to each of them with what cure suits it, as has been told about it in its own chapter.
And from what I have said, and in which you will make present to yourself the mind when a bone is broken and protrudes over a member, such as the os coxae, and assistive ones, and similar ones from large members, it is that you should not attempt to bring it into place, for death often occurs from this, nay, leave it alone until it becomes putrid.
For perhaps it will fall on its own after twenty days or thirty.
Then therefore treat the wound, if it seems good to you; and otherwise, leave it.
On the treatment of swelling in a track of a fracture.
This swelling often occurs in the path of healing a fracture. Especially near the joints: and it is disfigured by the shape of the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from performing its natural movement.
Therefore consider then, if the swelling is recent: administer to it medicines which have an astringent quality, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and resin of the tree called sarcocolla, and acacia, and similar things.
Thus take some of them, or all of them; and prepare them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with vinegar; and place them on the swelling in a compress, and bind them over it with a good bandage.
And leave the bandage, nor loosen it for many days. Then loosen it, and apply another one, until the swelling is removed.
Or bind over it a thin lead plate. For lead has the property of removing all that is feared from the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned to a stone and is hard and presses urgently to be removed: then make an incision over it from above down, and cut out the superfluous part that protrudes; or rasp it with some rasps until it is removed: and care for the limb until it heals.
On the treatment when it is restored, and the member remains after that subtle, not according to its natural form.
When a bone fracture is restored and the member remains after it subtle, weak: then that does not happen unless for many causes. One of these is the multitude of solutions to ligaments and ligation thereof not according to what is fitting: either on account of excess tightness of the ligaments, until it prohibits nourishment from flowing into the member; or on account of the abundance of superfluous embrocation at an improper time: or on account of the scarcity of blood in the body of the infirm person, and its weakness.
And the cure for this is to feed the infirm person, and to make their body tender, until blood multiplies in them. And administer a warm bath. And bring joy and gladness over him.
Then place pitch on the member, so that it draws pitch to itself as a great nourishment. And apply its ointment with warm water, until nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
On the cure of broken bones when they are set crookedly.
When it happens that a member already restored after its cure is bent and protrudes with the broken bone, or swells: and becomes disfigured in that form of the member, but the member is not prevented from performing its natural function: then you should not believe his words who thinks that the member must be broken anew.
And already there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who did it in our land.
And indeed this operation is very reprehensible, leading to death or a great fear, so that it may be mortal.
But if the stiffness and knotting are recent: then it is necessary that they be fomented with warm water, in which have been decocted softening herbs, such as the leaves and root of hawthorn, and meliloth, and similar things. And make a poultice for him with a softening plaster, such as well-made diachylon.
A poultice of the juice or sap of the elder tree root should be taken and pounded with chicken fat or sesame oil, and applied thereto.
Figs should also be taken and rubbed with pigeon dung, and similar things which are called from medicines diminishing consolidation.
And sometimes the knot is loosened by frequent, old, and gentle friction made with moist hands. And motion should be given to the limb in every direction at all hours.
But if the curvature has already proceeded and is strong, and has turned into a stone, and necessity for its cure with iron has been provoked: then it is necessary that what lies above it be sawed off, and the continuity of the bone be loosened, and what superfluously remains from the knot or bone be cut out with delicate scalpels; and ease be given to it with solicitude and effort.
About the treatment in dislocations.
A dislocation is the removal of some joint from its place. Wherefore it is forbidden from its motion and the figure of the member is spoiled. And it causes great pains and severe injuries to the sick person.
Therefore when a dislocation occurs in someone, it is necessary to hasten to restore it, nor should delay be made at all.
For if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and perhaps the reduction of the dislocation as well.
On account of this therefore it is not necessary to move or stretch it in the hour of its inflammation. For very often it causes spasms and hurting pains.
But when that happens, then it is necessary to hasten to bleed the sick person. Then let him be left until the inflammation subsides.
Then anoint the limb with warm water and oil. Then it should be returned with ease.
And every member should be dressed back with him whose recollection comes to its place.
I have indeed arranged the chapters on dislocations, even according to what preceded in fractures, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
On the care for the dislocation of the lower jawbone.
The two jawbones are rarely dislocated unless very slightly.
And the dislocation of both occurs in either of two ways. For they are either removed from their places with slight removal and become slightly relaxed. Or they are dislocated with complete, full dislocation until they become relaxed up to the chest, until the patient's saliva runs and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is rolled back around his speech.
When however its dislocation is slight, then it returns in many positions by itself with ease.
If however the dislocation is complete, then it must be reduced quickly and not delayed at all. And it is necessary for the minister to hold the head of the patient and for the physician to insert his thumb of one hand into the root of the jawbone's dislocation between his teeth, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he should insert both of his thumbs at once if the dislocation is from two sides. And the rest of his fingers should be outside to apply pressure.
And command the patient to clean his jawbones and clear them for eating on every side. And the physician should apply pressure to the jawbone and push it until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jawbones are together then administer a poultice with warm water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy: nor delay the reduction of both altogether as we said.
When therefore they return and congeal, and the mouth of the ailing person is closed and does not soften: then place on top of them woolen pads with wax made from wax, and rose oil.
Then it will be bound with ease with soft bandages.
And let the patient lie on his back and his head be placed upright between two pillows, so that he may not move it to the right or left nor try to masticate anything. Nay, let a gentle draught be given him until when the pains are removed and the jaw is loosened: then let him eat what he wills, and it will be administered with ease.
He should not struggle at the operation of his mouth during eating and drinking and gaping until the jaw is loosened and healed.
But if the reduction of the two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their place: then many times fevers and constant sweating occur, and perhaps the patient's belly will be dissolved, and perhaps he will vomit pure bile.
When therefore you see that, then know that it is a disaster, and he often dies to whom that occurs within ten days.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the shoulder.
The collarbone indeed is not dislocated from the inner side because of its continuity with the chest. And it becomes dislocated sometimes to the outside and this is made known by sense.
And its restoration is that the patient lie on his back and stretch out his arms. Then bind the place with your palm a strong constriction, for it will return.
Then put on top of it a plaster and woolen pads, and tie it.
But his extremities which follow the elbow and are connected with it, do not become dislocated unless rarely. When a joint is dislocated on some day: then it must be reduced and adjusted according to what we said, and what is prepared for you.
Then place over it a poultice, and a stricture. And command the patient to adhere to quietness and rest until they are healed.
And when this same cure is applied, the arm is reduced when it becomes separated from its place also.
Concerning the reduction of a dislocated shoulder.
Know that the shoulder does not dislocate except in three ways.
One of which is, that it dislocates to the upper part towards the lower. The second is, that it dislocates to the breast side. And perhaps it dislocates to the upper part of the shoulder, and that happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate towards the back because of the blade. And it does not dislocate towards the front because of the nerves.
And indeed it dislocates and comes out towards the lower side towards the armpit: especially in those whose flesh is scarce. For it comes out quickly in them and returns quickly.
But in those whose flesh is abundant, it happens contrary to that, namely because it comes out with difficulty and returns with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some people by a blow or a fall, and the shoulder is inflamed with a warm inflammation, and it is thought because of that, that it has already become dislocated.
Therefore you must experience that, until you are sure of it, and then proceed to its cure.
And a dislocation is recognized when it is towards the lower side towards the armpit: and distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a healthy one. For you will find among them a manifest difference, and you will find in the head of the arm a concavity, and under the little bony point near the touch of the head of the arm as if it were an egg: and the infirm person cannot reduce his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest, or upwards: then you will find a manifest touch, nor is it hidden.
And indeed an easy reduction of this dislocation occurs when it is recent, or the child is weak.
And its reduction is, that the assistant lifts his hand up to the upper part. Then place your thumbs under the bony point of it, and lift the joint with force up to its place: and the assistant lifts his hand and extends it upwards. Then set it back down, for indeed it will quickly return itself.
But if it does not return through what we said, and there have been many days since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary that the infirm person be bathed in hot water, and an embrocation be administered which softens and soothes, as if roots of celery, and fenugreek, and melilot were to be boiled in water, and it should be given.
Then the infirm person is placed on his back: and a ball of wool or flax is placed under the bony point of him which is equal between softness and tightness.
Then the doctor places his heel on the ball, and lifts the head of the arm with force, and draws the hand of the infirm person downwards.
And if you wish, reduce him according to this method: and it is, that you make the man who is taller than the infirm person be present, and stand at his side, and insert his arm under the bony point of the infirm one: and lift the bony point of him upwards, until the infirm one is suspended in the air. And another attendant should draw the patient's hand down towards his lower intestines. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that something else be hung with him to weigh him down, for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another method, which is that a long wooden beam be placed on the ground, with its top being rounded in shape, like a mortar cover, and not too thick nor too thin. Then cloths are placed under the patient after cloth have been put on top of the wooden beam, and the patient stands upright according to the length of the beam.
Then his hand is extended downwards from the opposite side, and his body is extended with force on the other side, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But if its reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this cure: which is to take a piece of wood whose length is two arm-lengths, and width four fingers, and thickness two fingers; and whose top is rounded, so that it may facilitate its entrance into the deep crevice, in this shape.
Then soft cloths are tied on top of the rounded wood so that it does not hurt the sick person.
Then it is placed under the patient's crevice, so that his hand or arm may be extended over the wood down to the lower part; and the wood should be tied above the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then his arm is placed over the step of the ladder in breadth, and his hand is extended downwards, and the rest of his body is left suspended on the other side. For the joint enters immediately.
When therefore its entrance is completed in whatever way it may be possible, then it is necessary to place under the crevice a ball of wool equal in size. Then place an ointment prepared from flour of the mill with frankincense and egg white over his shoulder all around, as it rolls off on top.
Then a cord is to be bound under the navel with some decent stricture: and the ligament is to be rolled over the plaster above; and its hand is to be joined to its neck, and it is to be left, not moving its hand for seven days.
And food should be put before the sick person in small amounts until the limb is comforted; for it will be more quickly on its way to healing.
Then a larger [one] should be put in place after seven days, or five, and it should be exercised with movement. Therefore if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated many times, either because of humidity that happens to it, or for another cause: then it is necessary, that a cautery with three holes be administered into it, according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
But if this is done entirely, and the ligament is dissolved after seven days, and the joint does not hold firm, and the plaster and stricture are applied to it many times, and still it does not hold firm and falls, and cannot lift itself up higher: then you should know that its nerves which are at the head of the humerus have already been cut, or stretched, or softened; and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
But the dislocation which occurs towards the breast and nipple, or to the backside, is reduced with a push and stretching with hands: until it returns, and there is administered into it the remaining stricture and care, until it heals.
And if heaviness occurs in the member and slowness in its movement after healing: then the patient should make use of a bath many times, until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
On the cure of the dislocation of the elbow.
You should know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated with difficulty, and similarly it returns to its place with difficulty also; and this very joint is dislocated in all parts, and especially to the front or back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: because it hangs under sight, and under touch, however it may be dislocated in shape. And when you join the dislocated arm with the sound one, it is made clear to you. For the joint swells and the arm cannot be straightened nor can it touch its own shoulder.
And you must hurry to reduce the dislocation at once, before a hot abscess occurs.
For if a hot abscess occurs, its reduction becomes difficult and it will hardly ever be cured, especially when it is in the back. For it is worse than all kinds of dislocations and has a more severe pain, and death often accompanies it.
And its restoration, when it can be reduced from them, is for his hand to be stretched out with both hands, and his arm to be extended, and the doctor's hands to be above the elbow and below it, and he himself should push the joint with the tips of his fingers together, or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or indeed the dislocation is in the front: then it returns so that he doubles his hand with his own hand until it strikes the elbow which is dislocated with the root of his palm.
Which if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then administer a strong and forceful stretching, so that two servants extend his arm, and also hold him, so that he may not be moved during the stretching.
Then let his arm be turned back to its original position after a doubled and long cloth or wide bandage has been wrapped over his hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil so that it may be among those things which assist in the smoothness of the joint with ease. Then let him push the joint with a strong thrust until it returns.
And after reducing it, a poultice should be placed on top of it, with astringency and drying with egg white: and it should be tightened with a suitable bandage. And the arm is suspended from the neck of the patient: and let him rest for several days.
Then it should be dissolved. Therefore if the joint is strengthened in its place, then loosen the bandage from it and let it go.
And if you see the joint not being well tightened, then reapply the poultice and bandage, and let it be for several days until it is tightened. Then loosen it.
But if heaviness occurs to him after the reduction of the joint and it is disposed in motion: then give an ointment for bathing, and subtle friction, and compression, until it becomes smooth, or place over the inflamed joint the fat of a ram's tail. Then it should be bandaged, and let it be on her day and night. Then remove it, and introduce him into a bath. When therefore he sweats, then rub the joint with tempered friction. Then reapply over it a plaster like once, and twice, and third time with the entrance of the bath, until it becomes smooth.
And if you wish, place over it cow dung, moist, warmed with butter, and bind tightly on it.
Do that several times. For indeed it becomes smooth, and returns to its proper condition.
Chapter on the cure of a dislocation by Almahassem.
The hand of Mahassem is frequently dislocated, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of his dislocation is easy. On the contrary, to other joints. However it is necessary, that there be swiftness in the reduction of its dislocation within an hour when it dislocates, before the place becomes inflamed; or a warm swelling occur in it.
And the reduction of its dislocation is, that you place the arm of the infirm on a table, and the attendant stretch out his hand to hold it; and the physician put his palm over the prominence of the joint, and push it until it returns.
However it is necessary to consider if the palm has already receded towards the belly of the hand; then let the infirm person place the back of his hand on the table by extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then the position of his hand should be internally on the table, that is, the inner part of his hand should be placed on the table so that the hand of the physician falls upon that very prominence of the joint.
So if it returns immediately, that is well; and if not, then bind it with a plaster to soothe the swelling: and let him go, nor do you repeat it.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you effect a reduction after the passing of days, however the joint remains according to its own tortuosity: and no harm comes to the infirm person, except that his hand is softened, and he cannot bind anything: then know that the nerves are severed or bruised.
It is not therefore a condition in it, except to be bound with a cautery near its case. And perhaps that does nothing good.
So when Almahasseem does not return, then place over him a plaster as we have narrated. Then let it be bound and let go for five days: afterwards it shall be loosened and let go, and the hand exercised.
But if it be deprived of its motion and something serious occurs in it: then temper it with warm water and sometimes friction until it is tempered.
On the treatment of the dislocation of fingers.
When a finger is dislocated in any direction, or towards the back of its palm or belly: then stretch out the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger and hang it towards the side to which it is dislocated, and let it go for two days.
Then hang him up and stretch him until it is straight on that day itself.
When therefore night comes, bind it according to its own narrative, and cease not to release it by day, and exercise it with motion, and bind it at night.
Do that for a few days until it is tightened.
And do the same with him if he is dislocated to the belly of the hand: and bind him to that side, and perform your first operation with him until it heals.
And do the same with him when he is dislocated in other parts.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the back vertebra.
When any of the vertebrae of the back or neck are completely dislocated, or many of them are removed from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death approaches the sick person.
And the sign of it is that the sick person's body issues pus without his will, nor can he hold it back: and many times some of his limbs become soft on him, or both his legs, or both his arms, or one of them: or a vertebra is removed from its place.
For often it happens that they are removed, which often takes place in four parts.
Therefore what is removed to the back is called Humpbackness.
Its cure however is, as you should consider then, if humpbackness happens from childhood: then there is no cure for it, nor is there any healing from it.
In those things however which occur by chance or stroke or similar ones, the ancients have already spoken in length about methods of treatment. Of which a great many do not yield with a good outcome.
Indeed I have now shortened from it because of the little that justifies against its much by my proximity to intention and through my explanation with which I explained it and formed its instrument in a different way than they showed it and presented it.
Therefore, I say that in the swelling which occurs from the front part, there is no cure and no healing from it.
And similarly in that which occurs to both sides as well.
And they do not get cured from them, unless that which occurs on the back properly, with this that I say and it is, so that the weak one stretches over his face over a flat surface near the wall: and a wet cloth is spread under him, so that his chest may not be hurt.
Then a straight and fixed piece of wood is put in a hole on the ground at the end of the platform, near his head: and another piece of wood near his feet at the other end of the platform: and the servant holds the stick and it is not fixed in the hole. And another servant hold the other one.
Then wrap over the head of the sick one and under his cheek a strong soft bandage: and stretch out the end of the bandage to the wood that is by his head: and bind it to it.
Then tie another bandage above his armpits and over his knees, and at the crooks of his elbows. Then gather all the bandages together and bind them to the other wood that is by his feet.
Then all the servants stretch out to the part of the wood with the bandage and they should not be removed from their places where they are fixed: but however they should not be fastened, as we said.
And the physician should place his palms strongly upon the splint until it returns (to its normal shape): or place a board on top of it. Then he attaches his feet to the board until it returns.
But if it does not return with this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms. And an opening in the wall which we said is near the sick person, a place into which the end of the board enters. Then place the middle of the board on the splint. And the physician should place his feet on the other end. And he should bind it well until the splint is constricted and returns to its place.
Then if you wish to do it with a lathe that is wrapped around your hand: and indeed, you fix into the ground near the head of the sick person at the last step two pieces of wood, whose length is one arm, and under his head in the last step two pieces of wood.
And let the length between all the wood be one palm: and thus it is made at every place a hole through which the lathe runs: and let every piece of wood be firmly fixed to the earth very much, so that it may not move at all.
And a round piece of wood is inserted: and the lathe is in which the tendon is turned around, in two holes of two pieces of wood.
And at its end is a hole in which the wood is fixed, whose length is with that which turns together: and similarly in two other pieces of wood.
Then bind the bandages which you bound on the chest of the sick person with the lathe that is at his head: and the bandages which you bound on his legs with the lathe that is at his feet.
Then stand beside every lathe the servant who turns his hand with an iron stick, with which the lathe is turned: and the physician should shape the splint, as we have said.
This is the form of a saw which follows.
Then after Spondilus has healed and the place has been made level, you must put on a drying plaster with egg white. Then dress it. Then place above the plaster a splint of wood whose width is three fingers, or about that. And its length shall be as much as covers the gibbous place and above the healthy part of Spondilus.
Then it will be bound with the bandage which we mentioned. And the patient should be nourished with gentle food until he is healed.
But if something remains elevated in the place at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and calm, with the application of the board which we mentioned over a long time. And now lead is applied to it.
And sometimes a prominence occurs in the last vertebra of the back and it is thought to be a dislocation, and that bone which now protrudes. Therefore it should not be presumed on with this medicine, lest perhaps death will result.
About the cure of a dislocated Ancah.
Know that the dislocation of Ancah and the dislocation of the shoulder joint does not occur except for a dislocation alone; nor do they suffer what other joints suffer from a small displacement and hollowing.
And indeed the Ancah joint is dislocated in four parts. Which is because it dislocates both forward and backward.
And indeed it dislocates most of all to the inside, and little to the front and back.
And the cure of its dislocation to the inside is this: because when you join the sick leg of the infirm with a healthy one, it is longer; and his knee is more prominent than that of the healthy one, and he cannot bend down his foot at the groin: and the place which follows the groin is inflamed, on account of the head of the hip having reached there.
And the sign of that in whom a dislocation occurs outward is, that are his accidents contrary to those accidents.
And the sign of that in whom a dislocation occurs forward is, because he straightens out the healthy leg according to its measure: yet he does not double it without pain that is in the knee; and if he attempts to walk, he cannot put his foot forward over it; and his urine is retained, and his thigh becomes inflamed, and at walking is a bruise on his heel.
And the sign of that in whom a dislocation occurs backward is, that he does not straighten out his knee, nor can double it until he doubles his thigh; and his leg is also shorter on one side: and his thigh is softened, and there is a prominence at the head of the hipbone.
The reduction, however, of this kind of dislocation is to consider then, if the dislocation is old, which already becomes stale with having it. Then if you administer a reduction to him and he remains according to his condition: then there is no treatment at all for it. Therefore it should not be supposed that it is completely incurable.
But in him whose dislocation is recent, and is of one of the four kinds of dislocations, then hasten to this, that you turn the joint and extend it inward and outward, and move it right and left: perhaps it will return, and he will not need any other treatment.
But if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that a strong instrument be prepared, and the leg be extended from below; or with his own hands, or with a bandage, which is to be tied over his leg above the knee: and another assistant extend his hand from above, so that he may insert his hands under the prominences of his thigh. Then let him bind it with a soft bandage over the head of the hipbone, and hold the other end of the bandage.
And let its extension be either from the front of the groin to the furca [or] from the back to the back of the torso.
And let the extension of all be vice versa one, until the sick person is lifted with his body from the earth, and remains hanging.
For this kind of extension is a common form of the four kinds of forms.
Therefore if the dislocation returns with him to what I said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species of that which I will say about proper cure.
Indeed in its own reduction when the dislocation is to the innards, it is necessary that the sick person be placed supine over his healthy side. Then he should place a bandage on top of the femur's root, in that which is between the head of the hip and the place that is under the groin. Then extend the bandage upward from the front of the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the furca.
Then let another strong assistant take hold of his arms and reduce the swollen place of the sick hip, and extend it to the outside with a violent extension. For now it is returning to its place.
And this kind of treatment is simpler than the other kinds of cures in which this member is reduced.
But if it is lifted above you and does not obey you for entering with this kind of treatment entirely: then it is necessary that the two feet of the sick person be bound together at once with a strong, gentle bandage, over the two heel bones, and over the two knees; and let the length of each one from its own comparison be four finger's breadth in quantity; and let the sick leg be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then the sick person should be suspended over a wooden beam in his house; and let its length from the ground be two arm's breadth.
Then command a strong youth to protect the head and pelvis of the patient: and let another young man support him; and let another youth push with all his strength, protecting the hip with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
But if it is his own reduction and there is a dislocation to the outside, it is necessary that the patient lie on a platform, just as we have said about one having a hump. And let the youth stretch the ligament over his own weak leg and over his chest.
Then two sticks are placed, one by his feet and the other by his head. Then a stick is placed in the middle of the platform, firmly fixed: over which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not hurt; and let the stick be between his hips, so that he does not bend down at extension.
Then the attendants stretch out in their direction, and the doctor adjusts the reduction with his own hand.
If then it submits to reduction, it will be good.
And if not, place over it a board, and press down upon it, just as we said about a hump, equally. However, it is necessary that the patient lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the weak leg be stretched quickly; and this is according to the same account on a platform: and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the groin of the patient. Then he compresses it with the other hand, and with that compression place him extended to the lower part towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary that the patient be extended downwards, and be lifted up from the earth; nay, it is necessary that he be placed on a hard surface, just as it also has to be done if his thigh bone is dislocated outwards, according to what we said about his lying on two thighs: and it is over his face, and stretched ligaments: just as we said recently.
And it is necessary that a compression be administered with a board even over the place to which the joint protrudes, when reduction is completed as is fitting.
And the sign of its return is not hidden from you: and it is, that you stretch out the two legs of the weak one: and when you see them equal, and the weak one tightens his leg and expands it without excuse: then know that the limb has already returned as is fitting: then join together the two thighs, and apply a poultice, and bind with a bandage, that is, a spiral: so that the joint does not move to any part: and let the weak one rest quietly for three days, or four.
Then dissolve the bandage and poultice, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in state, then know that the dislocation is already fixed: so release the weak one to walk.
And if you see something of softening: then return and apply a poultice to it, and bind it according to your first stricture: and leave it even for three days.
Then dissolve that and make it delay in walking on both sides for some days, until it is comforted well.
¶ On the Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated towards the outside, towards the inside, and towards the lower part, that is, towards the back.
And it does not become dislocated towards the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you order the patient to place his leg against his hip. But if it does not adhere with the hip then know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is that you make the patient sit up straight, so that he can already stretch out his leg if he can over it, and attach your back to his face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then bind his knee with your palms and place them straight between your fingers over his knee. Then apply both sides of his knee with the flat of your hand with force. And let another attend to stretch out his foot until his knee comes back to its place.
And the sign of recovery is, that the thigh adhere with the hip in calmness, not painfully.
Then apply a poultice to him and bind his thigh with his hip. Then bind them together with a bandage for three days or four. Then loosen them.
And the sick person should not walk for a few days until he is healed.
But if his return to place is refused to you, then apply a strong extension with bands of which the preceding narration was spoken in the cure of the knee, until it returns.
The treatment for the cure of dislocated calcaneus.
The heel is sometimes removed with a small displacement, and sometimes it becomes dislocated according to its completion. And its dislocation occurs either towards the inside or towards the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is, that you see the heel swollen, proceeding to the side towards which it is dislocated.
But the cure of its removal is easy return: and it is, that he be extended with ease by hand, and adjusted, until it returns.
But in its cure when it is dislocated according to completion, it is necessary that you make the sick person sit upright: and have a strong attendant hold him from behind his back, at the midpoint of himself.
Then take hold with your right hand his foot from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of his foot at the place of the heel.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with the left hand two fingers.
Then stretch out with the left hand and push the foot's chest with the right hand towards the knee without effort.
Do that twice as we have described.
Then push the foot's chest to the knee for a third time, and you draw out the bandage.
If therefore it returns in one way, or in two ways according to this method, and you see the foot equalized, it is good; and if not, then repeat the procedure on it, since it will return.
But if reduction is prevented from happening as we have described, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground and place a sturdy peg into the earth so that it falls between his thighs: and you meanwhile have wrapped a cloth over him so that the patient will not be hurt.
Then let the attendant take hold of his thigh; afterwards let the attendant straighten out another foot, or with his hands, or with a bandage that ties over the ankle of the foot. Then let the attendant stretch himself against the stretching of his own limb; and the peg shall be standing between the two thighs of the sick man holding him so that his body is not pulled towards the lower parts during the stretching.
Then let the doctor equalize the dislocation with his hands and the attendant shall hold the healthy leg at the lower part. For the dislocation returns quickly.
For when the dislocation returns and your treatment is declared successful: then apply a plaster and stuffing, and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And you must beware or be afraid of the nerves which are above the posterior calcaneum, so that the bandage is not very tight over them and hurts them.
Then let it go for two days, or three. And if the bandage becomes loosened, tie it again; afterwards untie it on the third day, or fourth: and forbid the sick person from walking for forty days. If indeed he is able to walk before that space of time, no security is created lest a dislocation be dissolved over him, and be corrupted, and not receive cure after that.
If it happens to him that a hot aposteme forms: then it is necessary for you to administer to him on his seat the thing of which our story went before in another place concerning treatment and anointing until it is removed.
On the dislocation of the fingers of the foot, and its cure.
It is necessary for him to be aligned with what has been dislocated from them with a few extensions without effort; and indeed that is not difficult, nay rather easy.
But if the dislocation is in certain knots of the foot or heel: then it is necessary for the patient to sit down his foot on a place level with the earth, or on a board: and he stands as one walking.
Then you stand, and put your foot on that which protrudes from those joints. Then step on it with your foot with force until it returns and you see the joint itself now aligned, and no longer appears to protrude.
Then place under his foot a board that takes up the whole foot with two ends. Then bind it with a suitable bandage for three days. Then loosen it and make him rest from walking for many days until it is bound and secured from slipping back into dislocation.
On the kinds of dislocations with a wound or fracture.
When something happens from that and you are attempting its cure and restoration, death often ensues; and on account of this it is not to be presumed over its cure, which is of this kind, except by one who is wise in the art through long practice, merciful, pious, slow, not rash or presumptuous: and that he should make use of medicinal remedies which calm hot apostemes only; and let the patient be released according to divine judgment. Unless you know, or hope for salvation from perdition with gentleness of the affliction, and where something appears that gives hope. Therefore be able to reduce it at once in the beginning of the thing, before a warm abscess occurs.
So if the member returns, as we wish, then administer a regimen that will calm the abscess; and care for the wound with it that is suitable to it from dry ointments.
Which if the dislocation is with fracture, and happens in bones separated from each other, then try to remove them, and do in that what we said about simple afflictions from what preceded in their places.
And beware according to your power, and guard yourself from entering the way of fear: according to what my preceding warning has been to you.
For it is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and safer to your body among them at your time.
