Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus they begin to recite the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last part of the science of medicine, by its completion one achieves perfection in it, and through its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I have provided you with a comprehensive treatise, which is a division of the practical work, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the practical work is so neglected in our region and in our time, that it has greatly suffered the decline of its science, and its practice is forgotten; and there remain none of it except for a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were obscure and led to error and confusion, until the understanding of it was obscured and its force was weakened and the art was prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I will revive this in the ordering of this treatise, in this way: by explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes to the forms of the preparations of cauterization and of other instruments of the work, as is necessary for the addition of the declaration, and for its preparation.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why no artisan is found with their own art in our time, is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the junctions of the members and the forms of those, and the connection and separation of them; and also the recognition of the bones, nerves, and cartilages, and their names, and their relation; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their origin.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And according to Hippocrates, the name of this condition is a word, more often used in minor works, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy, it is not surprising that they fall into error by which men die, as has been seen with many of them, because some are formed in this science and turn away from it and lack experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor having made an incision into a scrofulous aposteme on the neck of a woman, and having cut some arteries of the neck, through which a large amount of blood flowed, until the woman fell dead among her people.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who prescribed that he would swallow a stone of a man which was stuck in his throat, and the stone was large, and came out to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, through which that man on the third day died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called it foolish to extract that, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I conjectured that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he applied to a wretched black man, who had a fracture in his thigh; and with his ignorance, the doctor extracted the fracture, on top of the wound, with poultices and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to heal.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And return the disjointed according to the desires of the sick, and return the relaxed, and return the loosened by walking and commanding that we loosen the ligament; and it is necessary that this be between the thigh and the foot, so that the abscess forms, and turns into a loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And it is called a relief to him, and the preparation to loosen the ligament is achieved, and obtained is tranquility and thus alleviation from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But when corruption had already established itself in the member, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread in the member until the disease reached a crisis.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who made a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated in the same days, until the evil of it was magnified with the lord of it, the patient.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This is because the bitter humor is pure melancholy, then it is not suitable that it should penetrate to him entirely, but rather that it should be in a member which suffers so that all of it would be evacuated.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation on the ill person be divided into two divisions: one is the operation in which health is associated, and the other is the work in which there is danger in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already examined this in every place of this book where an operation is described in which there is error and fear; for which it is necessary that you guard against this and avoid that, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and accuse you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And then take your arms with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God to bring about health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible illnesses of difficult cure, and remove from your arms that which makes you afraid, so that trust in your faith and in your name does not fail you: for greater is the remainder of your glory, and afterwards in the world and lastly among your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Certainly I have spoken in some sick men's warnings:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	“Do not treat the bad illness poorly, so that bad doctors are not named”.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already devoted this book to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first from the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the head and the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the preparations of cauteries, and with what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on dryness and perforation, and on ventoses, and on plasters, and on extraction of arrows and on similar things to those, all chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on treatment of twists and on similar things to those; chapter ordered from head to feet, and on the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with focus and with sharp medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	When I describe the quality of the juices of that cautery and its outcomes, and in which condition it is prohibited to apply a cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the juice of cautery and its outcome is a long and prolix discourse, subtle for science, and hidden secret; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant among themselves, and for me it suffices to take a little from their discourses, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery is suitable for all universal complexion, whatever the material or non-material may be, except for two complexions, which are cold complexions without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complicated and dry matter, it will be decided; for some said that a cautery is helpful for that, and others said the opposite of that, that a cautery is not convenient in an illness which is due to heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it's convenient that a hot and dry illness with a cautious and dry treatment will be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And they say that which says the opposite of that, that with a cautery is made a remedy for all hot and dry illnesses that occur in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexity of fire, you find the body of man is cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the sermon of that one, that I have already experimented this myself many times and discovered.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I more openly say that it is not necessary for what has already been tried and discussed in the chapter on cauteries through previous exercise, and to have understood the diversity of the complexity of men and the disposition of illnesses in their treatments, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the timing of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other complications, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and humid illnesses, because already all doctors are in agreement on those, and they do not disagree on the treatment with a cautery in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you should know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, is that on a medical cautery, the fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not reach another member of the body except for a small injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of medical fire penetrates to that in the members where it is joined, and it makes come to the member with difficulty of healing a strong help and assistance.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not make it exceed except that it is superfluous; And we have joined to us through experiment and through length of service of study in the art on the truth of causes; and for this I excuse the length of the sermon; And if it were not that it is not read in my free will in this passage, a secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of its expulsion by which you expel diseases, in a philosophical demonstrative sermon, which would be sharp in your thoughts.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do a cautery and they pause for the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by the accident in time is submerged in the benefit of what the cautery attracts, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and frequent, which do not suffer delay for fear of those that bring malice, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And also do not step on your feet, or, sons, that they do not esteem except the common people and foolish doctors, it is that for that illness which is healed by cautery there is not need for all time, and they pause to consider the consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not known thus by them because of that, for cautery is not but in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries the humidity which are the cause for which come the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	More, I prefer cautery above medicine for the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and that which has come to it through its acquisition of food and similitudes of those causes; except that the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidity, just as a cautery for a tooth for pain and similitude to that, it is possible that in it the pain does not return, but rather decreases.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And most vulgar speech is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a speech of ignorance, not because they understand it, but because they believe that it is not a cure that is improved by medicine nor by any other cause except for applying cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is to the contrary; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer the means of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the treatment, cautery is administered, and improved by that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And it is said here that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which is understood by the common people and ignorant doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not matter, as it is not absolutely true, because it has been proven and found that it does not work except in some bodies other than the others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, as they said; but however when you do cautery with fire or with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is done according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and prepare to receive cold; and if you adjust it on the ignited spot, the gold melts by the fire, and pour some lamellas into the fire so that the artisan can take it for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And by this a cautery iron is made with a gentle touch and properly applied to the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that I alleviate the demanding thing that he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On the cautery for pain in the head caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization is contrary to humidity and cold on the servant's accidental [condition] of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of sweat and multitude of fluxes, called rheumatism, from the head to the parts of the ears and of the hearing fluent, and multitude of sleeping, and of pain in the teeth and of the throat, and universally of all malady that comes from cold, as well as paralytic, and apoplectic, and similar things in those maladies.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this, that first we command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the malady and their age and their custom require.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him sit between your hands on a wooden bench and place your hands on his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then stop the flow of your palm near the foot on the flow of the nose between the two heels.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More precisely, when the vein of the middle place is perforated, mark that place with a probe, and apply the olive cautery, which is the shape of this:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then stop that on the place you are probing with a hand that presses down, in such a way that the vein is constricted little by little, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and examine the place, and if you see the bone being uncovered to some extent of the head, like the quantity of a grain of barley, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to its previous position, or if another one appears, if it is inflamed, until what has been said to you is seen by the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and apply it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then stop it on the cloth wrapped in cotton and place it on until the scar of the wound is destroyed by the fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place with four-part ointment until it is healthy.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it has been said that as the wound becomes larger, so much better will be the arm, because it is more improved and younger.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They said that part of it should be cauterized where the bone enters, and hold the cautery in such a way that it touches some portion of the bone's marrow.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape off what is attached to the bone, and then let it heal.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	They said that others with the cautery should reach to the back, so that it presses into the bone strong pressure so that the bone breaks, and this is the method of small aphtha.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they think that from that place come out the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then be treated until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But to me, these two species of cautery have not been seen, except in some men according to the way of fear; and it seems to me, better is health, when it is; for the head is revealed by solution of continuity of the aforementioned, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and from that practice and with that work comes health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter according to.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the head suffers from chronic and prolonged pain, and this is in the patient's prolonged illness, and uses treatments such as poultices and suppositories and head wraps and plasters and bandages and cold compresses and liniments and remedies, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not relieved the symptoms of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature; and it is not fragile and suffers from great cold, then that cautery should be done with another cautery, leaving the previous one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that area on the horn of the sick head with a cautery until the cord is severed.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the cord and expose the bone the amount that we have described, and cauterize it with a cautery in the right part of the head, in the place which is called "vas" — and this is the place where airy flesh is found.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand thus, and do not expose the bone, because the patient suffers from very great pain different from the pain of all the other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery in its place, because it is known that the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is a more subtle cautery than the one with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Head of the bed.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	From the cauterization of an old migration.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain is located in the part of the head or it is a stabbing pain inside the eye, then evacuate the head with medicine that cleanses the head, and administer the other cure, which was previously mentioned in the treatment of illnesses; and not to prolong, there are two ways to cauterize: either cauterization with sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The most cauterizing of burning medicine is that you take a handful of salt, and scrub it and bind the extremities of the patient on both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then cut into the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet so that it is in the patient's bad blood which remains there, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply a bandage over the wound with a tight compression, and leave it there for three hours; and then undo it and treat the salt, and leave the poultice on for two or three days, and apply a plaster submerged in hot water until the place forms a scab.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with an ointment until it is healthy.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, make this with some burning medicines which have been written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	More with the cautery iron according to this method:  warnings for the cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And it is called key or end of the hands, because its head has a form like that of a nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then pause over the place of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery is not irritated, which is underneath — and turn the small iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is irritated by the narrowness of the tube is as much as its size, then raise your hand so that the artery which is underneath is not irritated, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak a cloth in salt water and apply it to the place, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a warm poultice, and treat with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see it, cauterize at the extremity of the knife wound according to the cautery, and beware of the cutting of an artery in this migration properly not ancient.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery of ancient migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat emigranea with the aforementioned treatment for the preceding cure, and what has been said about the divisions of illnesses, and do not hasten the cure, and sometimes due to the illness that is not enough for what has been said about the first cautery in medicine or the cautery with fire, then it is necessary that you apply the cautery iron which is albificated, because it indicates on the location of the pain along the line of longitude where the majority of the aforementioned is, or perhaps something else; and place your hand for a observation and hold it firmly while making an incision in the artery and penetrating through to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is necessary for you to be mindful of the continuity of the mandible, which is harmed by chewing, and that the ligament not be injured and the nerve which gives movement to it, and that it does not become dislocated with spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, because in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for one who ignores what they do and is not careful and does not proceed with caution; then leave the operation to someone who begins with competence.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come to the recollection of the rule for the flow of blood from the accidental injury of the artery, according to its own method, in its own place of freedom.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this sickness does not require the cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle place of the head thus as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in the chapter on extraction of arthritis with a cautery having two handles, and this is a better cauterization and more beneficial.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with lacative causes and with the other cure that has been spoken of in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, and this is what is called a point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And apply the point near the ignition, and let it be carried around the entire ear as if a wheel is turned, or in a circle around each part if the pain is in each part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Bring yourself to the cautery of the root of the ear little by little until you feel the place with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of ten points on the entire ear, and cauterize it, then treat the places until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cauterization of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Torture that is cured with cauterization is not one of the species that come from flow, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that originates from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of torture with poultices and capers and gargling, and you do not confirm your cure, then it is known that you should cauterize the illness with three cauterizations: give one to the root of the ear, and a second a little below the temple, and the third give to the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place the cauterization on the opposite side of the affected part, because mollification is only seen in the part that appears to be healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cauter on the right side of the extremity of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the aforementioned finger, and put your hand with the cauter inside until the quantity of the matter of the species of the cod is consumed.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is a species of the knife, the shape of which is in front of the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	More subtle is that which takes away a little, as it seems to me; and I believe that cutting from the superfluous fatness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place with what is in front, processed within so that it may be healthy.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cautery of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and it does not respond to your medicine and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the handling of the cautery is done according to what has been previously said.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more dangerous; and then it is treated with what is processed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of the cautery of oblivion caused by weakness.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	I believe that given to the patient at the beginning are bitter and great pills serving for purging.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then gently take the entire head of the patient and place it on the wooden plank described in this treatise's chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place those warm cloths, because that is the technique of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to the order which has already been stated by doctors.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so if healing occurs with that; and if not, then make three cauteries on the back part of the head, which depend on the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the thickness of the said cloth between each cautery, and then carefully treat the cautery with what has been previously prepared.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you are experienced and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle place; and if your experience is greater, then apply the cautery on the two temples.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then carefully treat it until it heals; and let the olive oil cautery be according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of paralysis and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	As you proceed with the treatment of the head with earth and with what has been said; and then take the head of the patient, and then apply cautery on it in the middle place of the head, and apply cautery above all the temples of the head, and apply cautery on the back part of it, and apply three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body due to excessive moisture and the illness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and strongly with a cautery until it is burned by the combustion of the codes of the same, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then return to cure that one until he is healed, and this one should be cauterized with an olive-tree cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter ten.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not the epileptic who should be cauterized, but that the epilepsy is due to a flux.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore we advise that you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with a mixture and another cure, which we have dictated in the division when the illness is great and it tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer gargling treatments and masticators to the servant that modifies, giving that for many days, with improvement of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And return to the head of the patient, and then cauterize that one with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the preceding manner, and with another cautery on the occiput of it, and on each horn of the head let it be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize them with the same cautery that has been mentioned, having previously softened and loosened the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the olive oil be cauterized according to what has been stated previously.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and gross weakness, then cauterize them with the same cauteries that we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an overflowing inclination towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them a drink that cleanses their brain according to what has been stated previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And shave the head of the patient, and make a decently made plaster of egg on the circle, and apply it to the middle place of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be sitting upright, and let them be held firmly from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And apply a liniment; it is also worthy to anoint the eyelids with elderberry.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	Heat that one on the fire with tempered warmth by measure, which the said sufferer feels most in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And apply that to the middle place of the head of it in a circle, and release it within so that it is refreshed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Make that to the patient for a whole week, with another regimen of it inside until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to the size of it, provided you hold the hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then put that cut in a poultice or in wraps of gualina.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter twelve.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of descending water in the wheel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you the beginning of water in the wheel by the signs which you have heard said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient that which cleanses the head of it, and keep it from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make it sweat in a bath for ten days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command it to shave its head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of evacuation of water in two wheels, or on one side if it is the beginning of evacuation of water in one wheel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Make incisions with a cautery on all the veins and arteries that are visible in the knee; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of flows of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see any flow of blood, stop it with some medicine, which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries and in the removal of those and caution of flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck where two bones are, with two cauteries placed backwards to produce a result.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter thirteen.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and assiduously flow through the veins and arteries which are in the obvious place of the head before and it is verified that this is a superfluous flow of phlegmatic humor, then cauterize it with a cautery, which we have mentioned in the chapter about the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle place of the head and with two cauteries on the neck behind two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck behind two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If the case requires it, then cauterize that entire area of the heel on the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of foul odor of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that with the remedy we have mentioned in the division and do not press your treatment, then prepare it and give to drink to the patient the decoctions for three nights; and rub the head of the patient, and cauterize it with a middle-sized cautery or an olive tree cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that area with a small nail-shaped cautery or two cauteries above the two eyebrows, leaving a small amount of hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the acidity that you do not inflame it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the nail-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cauterization for softening of the eyelids of the heels.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the heel is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery or with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries on the entire partition, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the swelling.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand too much with the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is irritated.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter sixteen.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted to the inner parts and the eye is punctured.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eye is converted to the inner parts so that it punctures the eye, then cautery is done in two ways, either with iron or with medicinal applications.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you apply the cautery with fire to the patient, command them beforehand that they should lift their skin like those who are about to be treated, until they are lengthened and widened; and if the needle is piercing too deeply, then tie the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that it is not moved until the skin is grown.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are grown and widened, place the head of the patient on your thigh, and apply a sign above the eyelid of their eyes with a thread, which is shaped like a fig leaf, and let this signal be close to the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then stop putting cotton in the wound or in the poultice of pitch on the ulcer.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply the cautery of which this is the shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the figure that has been designed, little by little, in small burned spots, until the surface of the quiver is completely burnt, which appears like a fig tree leaf, clearly apparent.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Signal of sanity of the present work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already being contracted and the skin of it being elevated due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then put on the wound a bandage until the scar is formed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal that with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns through the skin for some reason, then apply another treatment and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery on that one just as you had done previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin grows on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its own natural place and is evened out so that the skin does not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Put the cautery in medicine to burn and this is what commands the patient to raise their skin while they are prolonged and narrowed, and then make a paper of cloth in the shape of a miter's funnel.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap made from congealed and living snake, or what is called aqua, and mix those things together, and make a paste to prevent it from being cold; and then spread that paste on the paper which is made in the shape of a miter's funnel, and apply that to one of the soles of the feet; and apply the heel wrapped in a poultice of warm water, and let the patient's head be in a raised position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then put the finger on the medicine and press it a little and not on the veins so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, because this biting is in him like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then when he perceives that the medicine has a biting sensation, then raise the medicine and put it on the upper finger; then when the biting stops, then remove the medicine and wash the heel with water; and then consider if the swelling is already lifted like something washed of constriction by fire or incision, because this is good; and if it does not return to that place where the medicine was applied and does not diminish until the operation is completed and the heel is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause on the patient's back to ensure that the stiffness of the adjustment is eradicated, and treat that area with a soothing ointment or another entrance so that it may be healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, that you must guard your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid is softened in some days and some cause of the skin pinches in the eye, then apply your medicine to that area where the eyelid is softened, and properly as it was done at the beginning, and apply a dressing to ensure that it may be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of application of the plaster.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the eyes of men are diversified according to size and smallness, and thus your contraction is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let not be hidden the way of rectitude to he who has studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of the fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the method that we have discussed in the divisions of illnesses and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to pause with their head held back, and hold the head of the patient by some servant between the hands in such a way that it may not be moved nor agitated with the head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then pause to put cotton or a poultice of warm water on the wound of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then prepare the cautery in the shape that this is:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be concave, such as the shape of a reed or a dove's wing, on one extremity where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if it happens, let it penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it come out like a probe.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But I prefer that which is concave to be better for the whole work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and pull out from it blood and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then apply to it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then pause on it the cautery which should be well ignited, and give to that one the whole hand except a little below the cautery from the wound to the separation of the nose, so that not the hand or the patient is disturbed, and then pause the cautery in the depth of the wound and cauterize it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And thus if at the beginning of applying the cautery you see it enter into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and let it be like that for three days, and then pause on that wound with a bandage and wrap it with unguent exsiccative until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	More pain will be if it has passed eleven days and it's not healed, then pause on the medicine of sharp corrosive until the bone is uncovered and scraped according to what is convenient in the sixth chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there's another way of cauterizing a fistula, which the first doctors described: put it in the place of the fistula and make a hole and return to the narrow passage with subtlety, of which is the form of it: And put in it the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand with it with good retention, and do not move the patient so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the inside of that; and cover what you put on the inside of the patient with cotton soaked in white of egg or in water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterizing and of the cure, it's good; and if not, then it's necessary to administer a tube through the nose and return the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will come into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of the cauterization of the swelling of the feet.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times seen are ulcers in the lips, and mainly in the lips of infants.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the method that we have discussed in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small cutting cautery according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the convergence of it be according to the subtlety of the cut.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then carefully place that instrument in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there appears an apostema, and then it is broken, and then it is antiquated, and a fistula is made, and you treat that one and do not deepen your treatment, then take care that you apply cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that applied thing in the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron thing reaches the bottom of it, and afterwards make a dressing, one or two; and then treat it with the method that we have discussed regarding treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus if the blood is separated and purified, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what is described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of the teeth and the softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and not with confectons, then place the patient's head in a sling, and take a cautery in the shape of which will be described later, so that you place the swab on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cautery, gently and slowly, and make a small hole so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be penetrated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and apply the cautery repeatedly as needed.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then let the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When pain in the tooth is caused by cold or heat, or if the verm or worm does not respond to medical treatment, then a cautery is applied according to two methods: either a cautery with a hot iron or a cautery with a burning coal.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a hot iron is that you take a hot iron rod and burn it in a coal fire, and then wrap the iron in cloth and apply it to the affected area, and then dip the iron in boiling water, and place it on the painful tooth, applying it gently until it becomes cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat this process several times until the virtue of the heat penetrates to the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge a thread or cloth in the hot iron mentioned earlier, and place it on the painful tooth, and place the hot iron over it until the iron penetrates to the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But beware of the cautery with fire that you pay attention to the size of the iron or rod, and it should be in the core of some thickness so the sharpness of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form that you want, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery becomes cold; and do this several times a day, either on that day or on the following days, until the pain is alleviated.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that the patient should put their mouth on the good opening of the cautery and hold it for an hour and then remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize to the extent that you can, according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cauterization of excesscences or tumors.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When excesscences are of phlegm and cold humors and are not obedient to digestion by medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form of which this is the following, having two extremities covered so that the smoke of the cautery goes through the other extremity, and place that ignited thing on that apostema for a while, and another time if it is necessary for that one, until it penetrates to the bottom of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and remove it after three days and place on the wound a dressing in good order until what the fire has burnt is restored.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And treat that one with ointments and bandages and dressings until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or of the cautery is such that it conveys. 
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter twenty-three.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of the throat and constriction of the spleen or alternatively,  Of cauterization of the region of the voice and of the constriction.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes into the channel of the lung, and especially when it is mixed with coldness of temperament, then it is advisable that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the vein at the root of the throat in the affected place.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not touch the throat with the cautery nor burn the cartilage of it except a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize it with another cautery on the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And his cautery be done in the same manner as previously mentioned.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with that which has been previously stated, until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter twenty-four.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cauterization of sickness of the lung and of cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung sickness are from cold humidities and the patient has no fever nor wasting, and it is an old sickness, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected places on the arms and shoulders; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be done according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, then your cauterization should be done with a cautery that is called a point, the shape of which precedes in the treatment of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points between the sides to those; and then heal that which is treated before it becomes healthy again.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And you should have the cautery having three hooks because cauterization is done in that way: in one session you can make three cauteries according to this method:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization of the nipple which is the tip of the helper or assistant ( possibly referring to a part of a medical tool or the body part that assists in a procedure, likely the
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the helper is dislocated due to causes of lubricating humidity and is not held firm at the time of its return, you must return its dislocation before it becomes customary to return, and then with a small movement it is displaced so that it goes in, as we have testified, when we primarily reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is turned over on their back or on their side; and then lift the cod (possibly referring to a tendon or ligament) which is in the inner part of the nipple to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in the inner parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery having two ends; and this is the form of it: 
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the vein so that it penetrates to the other side; and the figure of cauterization will appear, which is customary with four irons or cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is according to the quantity of tension; and this is the shape/form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some adjusted burns are made according to this count and for which there are three cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause on the cautery with salt water, and make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member not be moved for some time while it is being comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the lower parts and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a key-shaped cautery or with many pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and many humidities come into the stomach so that it extracts from its complexity and is thus multiplied to it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confirm, then it is seen that the patient is on the seventh day resupinated, and extends their hands and their thighs, and then cauterize with three cauteries: one cautery placed on the chest for the quantity of a finger with a key-shaped cautery, and two cauteries placed on the two sides of the chest, until the figure of a triangular cautery appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so that they will make a poultice.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the skin of the cod.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the figure of the cautery be added according to this form, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized by pricking the one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you place stitches on the stomach according to the quantity that you want with a needle, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the cold fever.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the liver due to cold or humidity or excessive fatness until it is expelled from its normal composition by superfluous excretion, and the patient is cured with what we have said and not conflicted, then it happens that the patient is suspended on their back, and stitches are made with a needle with three cauteries in this form and quantity placed on the liver under the hypochondria, where one can see the decline of the disease.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the said thing, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press your hand on the moving cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is administered is equal to the quantity of the mixture of the specific treatment of the coda, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already spread their thighs, and lifted their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And to you it is possible to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the specific treatment of the whole coda be administered so that it penetrates the entire body and reaches the intestines, for the coda is subtle here; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the perforation of the abscess of the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an abscess or swelling in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience severe gravity and increased pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the liver, then the pain is greatly increased and many times the doctors have exhausted the cure for it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be turned onto their back; and secure the area of the abscess with a bandage; and apply the cautery iron, which is assembled like a razor, the shape of which was described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that iron, so that the entire cord is seared, until it reaches the spleen, until it penetrates to the liver, where the blood will stop.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one with the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one for which the study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and on which many maladies have been experimented; but however some experienced men have argued about this operation, but still I will tell you what seems good to me.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cauterization of wounds.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient doctors said that the roots of aristology should be cauterized in a wound according to this manner: it is necessary to take a root from the aristology plant, which is a long and thin root that is found, and it should be the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and bring it to the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries guiding, slightly inclining towards the part that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the crotch, declining slightly towards the back parts; and with another cautery in the middle location of the chest; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with a cautery at that location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not think that you should press your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be evident in the manifestation of the work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And the experienced old men said that they were experienced in treating men who used a iron cautery resembling a rod and ignited it, and put it in the location which is between the ribs, until they reached with it to that apostema and extracted the unhealthy matter, just as we have said regarding the apostema of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, because what happens most often is that it closes the fistula at the location where there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the wound.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the wound of the thigh with what we have said about treatment in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are effective, one of which is to make three or four marks according to the length of the wound, according to the shape of the cauteries on the foot, the shape of which has been previously described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cauterization the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cauterization should be the same as what we have said regarding the cauterization of the foot, namely.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand on the cauterization; and let the patient be elevated on their back with two pillows.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way of cauterizing, which is that you should ignite the cautery having two vertices, which cause we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the tendon which is in the interior of the thigh where the vein of the patient's left sinew or nerve is visible.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you elevate the tendon according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two vermilion instruments, ignite the wick, in that entrance through which the cauterizing tool penetrates the skin of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three vermilion points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then cure the cautery after having waited for many days, for it is more confident that the other causes precede in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not applied in dropsey but rather on the affected joint specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsical person with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not confirm their treatment, then it is necessary that one applies cautery with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the liver, and one cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the ribs of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then place the cautery iron near the opening so that it can be held for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient's waste near the cautery unless it is covered so that two cloths can be applied to them, and they will be helped by a healthy assistant.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery on which the belly is cauterized should be like a key, and according to the form of that which precedes it, and the back should be olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are affected by dropsy and are full of acrid water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the area that is between the ear-like and ankle-like parts, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not touch that; and then raise your hand, and do not return it at all, because the acrid water flows out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Make the cautery in this form: And then make on both thighs two cauteries, and on each thigh make a cautery at the extremity of the cutting cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one at the knee and the other in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the opened wound to heal for a long time so that some water comes out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat the hands for those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterization of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is due to cold and humidity entering so that it weakens the virtues, which are the digestive and retaining virtues, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is treated with the methods of treatment and not confused, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cauterization of the virtue showing, then cauterize that one with a large cauterization on the upper stomach as has been described in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterization of the circle and with four cauterizations in the subtle circle of the navel, with a subtle key-shaped cauterization; and with a cauterization on the hip on the large kidneys, or with two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excess humidities are exhibited and the patient cannot tolerate it, then cauterize that one on the navel and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauterizations on the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure of youth, from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 94.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are in the nature behind old hemorrhoids or one of gross humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not respond to the treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus of the spine of the back, little by little, triangular, and with a cautery above the navel for two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it appears that the patient's stomach is weakened and their food is not digested, and their face is often discolored, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the middle of their back with a key-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and carefully treat the inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 95.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cauterization of the thigh near the abscession of the tumor.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise the thigh, then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a grid.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited thing into the excised thigh, and hold your hand inside so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make a cut or incision, for if the humors are excessive, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and immediately cure those with cauterization that contribute to their healing.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the bladder, it is more damaging in young people.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter thirty-six.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the behind, in the lower parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the anus does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when someone has a fistula in the anus behind, and it is chronic, corrupted blood and rotten humidity corrupt it, and therefore that which is most worthy to be cured is what proceeds from the subtle thread, and then measure the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned thread.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery that resembles an arrow.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the thread penetrates.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery on that place until those corrupted bodies are cauterized, one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, beware of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place within which it will be cured.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and its matters are cut off from it, and it rests thus for a long time, then know that it is entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the press of its rotten bone, or this comes from those causes of which a reminder will be mentioned in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the kidneys.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the kidneys a pain is caused by cold or by great swelling, and thus the cot of the patient is constricted, then it is advisable to cauterize that which is over the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a clave or key, from which one expects the remedy.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strengthen the cauterization on the second with a small device, so that three linear cauterizations come, and then serve as more reliable in joining.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is weakness and softening in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part above the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side, and also on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of nodes on the foot; and cauterize that part with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be shaped like a nail according to what is needed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter thirty-nine.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the uterus.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come to the uterus, and because of this there is difficulty in conceiving, and the menses are corrupted, and their arrival is delayed, and there is pain in the abdomen, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the bladder; and with a cautery above the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be shaped like a nail.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture and mucus accumulate at the ankle joint, and are caused by the imbalance of its position, it is a sign that one thigh is longer than the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is found in which way it is bent.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have felt with your hand around the circumference of the joint, and in such a way that the joint falls into the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be of the kind previously described for the treatment of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize with three irons or with an olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire cord; and then heal the wound so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with what we have said before and it is not effective, then it is necessary to purge the patient of gross humors with foul or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The handling of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either with a medicinal cautery that burns, or with a cautery using fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It will be according to two scientific methods, of which one is that it cauterizes the area on the patient's hip with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so to a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space that is between each cautery be the amount of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive or grain-sized cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often, the cautery is on the middle place on the head of the ankle for which there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle in which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, that the circle be continent and burn the tenderness of the entire cod.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is adhering to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh in the place where the pain turns, and with one cautery on the hip a little below the iliac region.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery cuts, then let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the inflammation of the codena.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain has spread to the area proper to the toes of the feet, then cauterize that spot with a cautery for three points or four or more if it is indicated for that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains of pain being in the knee near the thigh, then cauterize that spot with a sharp cutting cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not touch with the cautery any nerve or large artery, and that because of this there is no bad occurrence or contraction on the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	I have already seen one and another of those whom I have cauterized on the hip and finished with the cauterization, and the leg became inflated within where the tumor reached the foot, and it became perforated and corrupted the whole foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then comes a strong purging of the belly, and then comes death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	They say that the wise ones in cauterization of this cautery, of which this is the method: make similar to a circle of iron, of which the circumference is the size of a palm; and let it be thick according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And indent that circle another thumb; and let the space be the amount of the knot of the foot; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those chains be a knot or two knots, and make in that margin of iron decently apparelled irons in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then set fire to the focus within which it will ignite and emit sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the water, the patient reclining on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that wound with three cauteries arranged in a row.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then plaster that wound with poultice and leave the open wound for many days; and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this species of cautery we have made little use because of the fear of its management, and because we have found few who manage it properly.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	It is better for those who undergo cauteries to suffer them, and to remove them from the place where they are.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	It is better to cauterize with medicines that adhere, that you make two circles having an armula perforated in which the iron hook of the door should pass; let the length of the partitions be in the thickness of them two knots or four.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each of the quantity of the thickness of the said thing; and let them be opened above and below, and let them contain themselves within them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then stop on the part of the ill person's flank, and press your hand on the part of the flank; and take some hot water and put it between two cloths, and let the quality of that be near the small fire little by little, and apply that for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient suffer the biting and adjustment of it — because that bite is like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from the entire flank with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it be for three days and apply on that wound until the blackness of the adjusted healing is removed, and let it be for several days, and cleanse his foot from the pus; this is the last treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a plaster for it that contains water as is done in the aforementioned treatment.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and non-extinguished lime, take a portion of it, and put it in a new vessel, where the portion will be perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the patient.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And put the bottom of one vessel into another vessel, and pour over that alkaline and living lime sweet water which takes those with a finger, and once you have compressed them well with your hand for good compression, and let the vessel that is emptied of the sharp water be in the vessel that has been emptied.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living lime and other renewed alkaline, because that water will be very strong and sharp, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for a fire operation.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of the medicines some are those with which it is cauterized, like tar and honey and melted wax mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts from an ancient man the operation and the cure with which is cured pain of water and of vein sciatica, and magnifies many things about that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and that it is healed by a single glance, just as one recommends, for the strong effect that this has in bathing and he had already said that it was enough.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that a green paste is applied, and if no green paste is found, a fresh fig is applied; and the moss is trampled with a few grapes and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and is tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it is left there for a duration of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then put him in a bath and when his body is sweating, dip him into the mud, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that it's not suitable to use cautery with these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Moreover, Escorides says that when the vein of the calf is cut, it should be cauterized; and apply to the wound in this manner: take a wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the metatarsal bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry calf vein and burn it in the fire until it becomes charcoal; and apply it to the wool and tie it on so that it is held tight.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop doing it until the inflammation of the bite has passed into the ankle and relieved the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this manner of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of pain of teeth.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some wounds are painful in the back for trivial causes, such as from a fall or a blow or from excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to the infusion of cold and humid material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not applied except in this single case which is made by the infusion of cold material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, apply evacuation to the patient with warm pills and similar things, which are made on the back where the pain is, three lines according to the width of it, placing seven or eight cauteries in each line, according to the quantity that you see of the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let the cauterization be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using the median clavicle cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cauterization at the beginning of gibbosity.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease appears to small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they become stiff on them with a curvature in the leg, with elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will touch upon the last vertebra of the back and the knots of the patient that have already begun to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that which is around with a cautery that follows this shape:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery takes on the entire affected part of the vertebrae equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points made be properly spaced between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the place within which it is sanitized with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cautery is not administered in yellowing that is made by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cauterization of gout and of joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then how gout of cold cause is cured with manipulation of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they are alleviated by cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you should cauterize with evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with heated cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be an olive tree cautery of which this is the shape:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains increase in the teeth or in the other joints, and this swelling endures, then cauterize that one on each tooth with three cauteries or four of the whole part with this olive tree cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed so that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize that one and do not press too much your hand with the cautery beforehand, but only surround the area of the burn.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains increase in the tooth and the two, then administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the sixth chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called sugar disease, then prick in the circuit of the kidneys thus as they turn, prick in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick in the circuit of the kidneys on each knot and on the joint of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if pains push close to the joints or the muscles, then cauterize each of them from the entire affected area.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is done and the flux is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the limbs and intestines are coming out through the hernia, and this is a common occurrence, then advise the patient to leave their food for that day and to use soothing remedies so that the wound of their belly may heal.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to hold their arm inside so that it may be supported or held in case the hernia or intestine comes out.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return to the areas that have been mentioned and examine for rupture on the bone of the pelvis with sign of fracture on the extremity which seems similar to the circle of the divided parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Into that which is moved by red and yellow bile.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant is beside their legs, and another on their chest, who holds their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that sign with your hand, and if it is right, so that in the patient's consciousness the bone enters into the middle of the buttocks; and repeat this other procedure if you have not succeeded in the first procedure.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the time of your cautery, that you do not touch that intestine so that the patient does not come into death or other great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery, if you do not touch the bone, your operation is not effective.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is fitting that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then treat the place of the cautery for three days with a bandage until the wound is healed by the heat.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the place and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And take care that you administer nourishment to them according to the length of time of their treatment, which will allow their belly to digest, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of straining.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when they want to get up after forty days, administer a moderate and decent diet, and keep them like that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them be spared from work and from eating rich food and from drinking, and from violent vomiting, for when they use this regimen of complete healing they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and it is not necessary to repeat, then cauterize the rupture of that one with a heated cautery according to its quantity, and let it be what is exuded from the coda thus as the third part of it; and then treat that one with what we have said, and it is not suitable.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already said to some first that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is touched with a tent.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a paused line is made through the width in the flesh above the rupture, and another line below; and pause your hand with a cautery key, but the first cautery is put more gently and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cauterization of the torso.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain is entrenched in some members by blow or by percussion and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medicines, then it is advisable to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be of the entire member according to its size and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location on the torso and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if it is healed by the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then repeat on it the cautery; for it is customary with those pains that they be punctured in the member to which it approaches, because it is advisable to continue with the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes treated with a cautery for great benefit, and especially if the type of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so if you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is contagious and if that treatment is with what we have said in the division and not otherwise, and you fear for the patient that the corruption will comprehend the entire body of theirs and their entire complexity, then cauterize that person on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one on the right side of theirs, and one on the forehead to the end of the hair; and two on the horns; and one at the back, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, put your hand on the cautery for a little while to press into the bone a small impression, and let their shoulders be dislocated so that the expulsion of gross vapors is alleviated from them; and cauterize on the middle as it is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is advisable that you cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the two clavicles, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on the hips, and one on each hip, and two on the knees and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the sixth rib; and cauterize that person on all the joints of the limbs and thighs, and on each heel of their feet, and on the soles of their thighs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Be careful with the nerves that are on the sole of the foot, so you don't hurt them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the kneecap and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more adjustments of cauteries you make, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not have pain from the cautery, unlike their usual ailments, because the body of the patient is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is seen that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and the joints, as it is determined by the species of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery with flour of burnt earth, mixed with honey and with another remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization of numbness.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the cautery penetrate the thickness of the skin a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the one who has entered into the anointing that will bring health.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And some treated areas are cauterized with a stupor that affects the hands and feet, and the spine and back, which is the seat of the nerves, which govern that member, and the stupor is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not touch that except for one who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the path of the nerves throughout the entire moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of ulcers that are gangrenous.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an ulcer is old and does not respond to the poultices of medical ointments, then you cauterize it with a cautery iron, taking a little according to the quantity of the species of the cod Liver, until the whiteness and color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the one who has a poultice made from flour of oats and lentils with oil of rose and leaves of wormwood, and blood of pigeon or blood of swallow, each one a portion and all mixed together, and then it is applied as a plaster on the area where it will bring healing.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cauterization of cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is suspected and you want to treat it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the circumference of the affected area as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it is not visible, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterize around the circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple small cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter fifty-one.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the cauterization of anal fistula.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some anal fistula is delayed in maturation, and this is due to the excess of material that forms it, or because of the age of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the fistula; then cauterize around it with many small sharp points; and immediately apply a dressing so that it will close in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape, and apply it to the middle place of the fistula until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied in that place where it is put, so that the body of the arm is alleviated; then carefully treat that interior part that needs to be healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter Two.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cauterization of corrosive substances.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes that part as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that corrosive substance in a place where the cautery is suffering from fire, then ignite small irons, and apply them in a gentle and gradual manner, as is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that entire inner part from which the corruption radiates, so that all of the corrosion is eradicated and no cause of it remains.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it be for three days, and apply on the cauterized places a dressing made with oil mixed with other things, so that the scars are entirely eradicated and all of the corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with an ointment that generates flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that healthy flesh is born in which there is no corruption, that's good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains rotten in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	Eating away is a medical treatment with some sharp medicines, for that is a substitute in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	More often cautery is made at the focus of the pus to drain it gently.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And already I have said the cure of it with sharp medicine in division, and therefore take that one when of its urgent need.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 3.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cauterization of wounds and of the other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Matters to be considered in the divisions of the foot of a patient who is called clau, and it is a gross cause, an entry, which damages the foot; and cauterization in these is according to two methods, that is cauterization by fire and cauterization by hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The most common method of cauterization by fire is that you should make the cautery resemble a pen for writing, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that the wound contains, and it should have subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then apply the ignited instrument to the wound, and then turn your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the wound until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wound.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it there for three days until pus starts to flow out.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made from wild mallows crushed with salt, and place the plaster on that area for nine nights, so that it will eradicate the root of the ailment.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the area with an ointment made from generated flesh, so that it will be healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and warts appear on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then take a cautery iron in water, and take a needle of iron or of stone or of pumice stone, and place that on the nail; and then put a small quantity of hot water into the needle, and hold your hand back, and you turn that with compression of your hand, and press the edge of the needle on the root of the nail, and introduce the hot water through the pressure of the root of the nail; and let the patient wait a little for the penetration of the hot water for one hour, and then remove it, so that the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do the same on those areas and then apply another one so that it comes out all over their joints in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those areas where the roots of the nails have been eradicated with ointments that generate flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you have a patient with trembling caused by cold in the nerves or by fever of any cause, then it is advisable that you cauterize them with four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, between each vertebra a cauterization; and a cauterization on their chest, and another on their stomach, an olive tree cauterization.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of his is relieved and the health of the cold illness is restored.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter Five.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of accidental wounds to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are protruding wounds and there are pus-filled sores which are made of gross corrupted matter; then it is advisable at the beginning of the treatment, that it be cauterized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cauterization, or with a burning of myrrh, whose extremity is extended to the focus; or with a razor of long aristology; or with a viscous cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some wounds are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed to be credible, and the excess is broken up, making them healthy, and curing them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Maybe the emperor ordered that this be done with proper evacuation of the blood.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of abnormal flow of blood by surgical incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Treatments applied to stop the flow of arterial blood that is cut due to a wound which cuts too deeply, or due to an incision of abscesses or cauterization of a limb, and it seems similar, and it is difficult to restore that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when it happens to someone, then you should press with your hand on the orifice of the artery, and place over that the ligature or bandage so that it holds and tightens those applied remedies inside which block the flow of blood, and do not let it come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply to the focus of the cauterized places warm and large poultices, by name "motions", and blow on those inside so that they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those a small or large piece of vein from the location and the wound in which the artery is broken, and sew it onto that place firmly so that you have restored the ligature, and apply the cauterization inside so that the blood is constricted and restrained.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the tie and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to apply it until the blood is constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not touch the nerve that is here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And be aware that when the artery flows with blood, it is not possible to constrict the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as mentioned before, or with extraction when it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of the member are burned and the blood is constricted, or that it is tied with a thread or with a ligature for strong constriction, or that they are applied with medicines whose virtue is to constrict the blood; and they are strengthened with a pillow or with a bandage.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	More importantly, one who administers a decent constriction with a ligature and a bandage or with clothes, or by the position of causes that burn and of similarities, does not do so hastily but gently.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If that pain should be intense and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then apply a warm poultice to the aforementioned orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand that in the great constriction of the intestine the blood is stopped from the upper part of the wound, and on the area above it is not warmed; and above the area apply a cold and very chilly water to congeal and thicken the blood; and consider if there should be applied a cauterization or medicine of necessity.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second section.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation, and of evacuations, and of phlebotomy, and of wounds and their similars.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the teachings of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which a hot cauterization is convenient and with medicine to burn, and the occasions and causes of it, and the necessary instruments for the forms of the cauterizations; and we have ordered the chapters concerning the subjection of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter for that medical treatment, so that it may be alleviated what the seeker of it is looking for, namely regarding what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	It seems that you should begin by warning them about this, son, that they learn in this chapter the fear of what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because of this, beware that there is great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many careful observations are needed to evacuate what is with blood or on the vein or incision on the posthem or apprehension of tissue or purification of the wound or extraction of the arrow or incision of the skin and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their hands there is almost always death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is in the aforementioned, for some observations are dependent on you to have good manners as men and many manners of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them, it is some that flee with their illness and fear the death, and also because of the violence of what they find in their illness, and for the length of their illness, and in the illness there is a fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those, it is one who gives you to understand and say, you hoping for health, and their illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore do not believe in that which you see of the one who comes to you with this treatment; and your caution should be greater than credulity and your recklessness; and do not presume any cause concerning this except through certain science which verifies what you must do, and for which successful outcome is awaited.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use it in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication to him who is health converted, for in that you are helped with the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and of glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, God inspire in you the divine understanding and grant you direction and protection, for this is in his hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have written and ordered this chapter distinctly by chapters as it precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that it may be facilitated for you what you demand of it and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness, often seen in infants, must be given the treatment and when the nurse tightens the head of the infant it loses its vivacity.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some times it happens for an unknown cause which is not understood.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this illness except in children; and all those who I have seen with it have been killed by it, and thus I consider it a fatal work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of it was so magnified to the point that the child could not support itself because of the greatness of its head, and more that the humidity caused an increase until mortal harm.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is gathered between the cartilage and the bone, or is gathered under the bone on the siphoid bone (or near the xiphoid process).
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that case where the humidity is between the cartilage and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head with a slit in the width, and let the length of the slit be two nuts so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatulum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And then if the humidity is even more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two slits in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is under the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head opened from one end to the other and the water is squeezed out when you press on it with your hand at the separated parts and it does not come back in.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Make sure that you make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract the entire moisture from the incision; and then wrap the wounds with bandages and plasters; and then apply oil and wine externally on the fifth day, and then uncover the wound and cure it with tents and poultices, and bind the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which considers when the size of the abscess appears and the collection of the water, because some times it is bigger on the occipital bone, or on the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and so proceed with the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of the water appear, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be careful not to cut the artery and do not allow blood flow, lest the patient die from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hilassions.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When the disease has progressed to the arteries of the shoulders or the hips, and it is chronic, and the medical treatments do not agree on this, then the last cure in this case begins with the opening of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then proceed when you want to cut into the scalp of the patient, and rub the area with rough cloth to reveal the arteries, and hold the patient's neck with another cloth; and consider the pulse of the vein; and the places on each one corresponding to the places where you previously pressed the ears, so that they are hidden in some homes.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark the artery with a tent, and cut each one in the spatium of each affected part, making a precise incision entering into the bone, and let that be the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatium beside the artery and divide it to reach the incisions in the lower parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers adjusted, because when any vein is cut, the blood exits with pulsating egression, which stops with frequent pressure.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear to feeling, then it is necessary that you measure from the ear the quantity of the space of three fingers, and mark with a tent, and make an incision into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which is to be taken from the blood is a quantity of twenty units, and take it from their veins or months, and all that is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replenishment of their liver.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of sciatica, then cut it out so that no abscess or tumor forms.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with bandages and with a dressing of linen cloth, and cure it with an ointment so that it becomes healthy.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the blood from the temples which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When to some people an old or chronic disease occurs, due to humid and bad qualities in the temples, or an old and violent pain seems to be in those, and it is treated with the art of medical cures and this does not help, then we have spoken about extraction of blood from the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of operation and extraction is that the patient scrapes off the skin which is on the temples; and it begins with the apparent vein in the temple, because it appears to you through the blue veins, and is hidden except in few men due to violence of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if the area is concealed, then bind the patient's neck with some cloth; and apply cold compresses to the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until it appears to you that the arthritis is visibly reduced.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the spatula, of which this is the shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then scrape the channel with that which facilitates entry until you reach the joint; and cut into the tissue and extract that from the upper parts until you extract it from the channel and discover it from the tunics which you had left there, of the whole piece.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the extremity of the groin, and cut from it a part according to the quantity by which the extremities of the tissue are lengthened and contracted, and you will not find a flow of blood, for if they are not cut, the blood will not rise at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate three cups of blood from the vein.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you ligate it in two places with double thread of hemp or with cords of flax, and do not allow putrefaction before consolidation of the wound and find a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that hour or at another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that wound with a cautery iron within the bone with a cutting iron where the extremities of it are cut, and put in place of that defective member.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is a better work if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; for cautery is one of those causes that helps to dry out the harmful moistures, and thus it is better in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then take out the extraction of the arteries that filled the place of the old abscess, and let them be covered with decently made poultices, and then let it be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with clamps within which it will be healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another vein is found with a flow of blood from the artery, then restrain that blood, either with a ligature or with a cautery, or fill the place of the cut, and press your hand within so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is at your disposal, then apply a cold dressing on the area so that the blood is congealed, and wrap the area with water of vehement coldness so that the sharp pain subsides, and let it be tightened as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And this is what is called easier extraction of the artery, that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, since you have sensed the two areas with your finger, and applied it to each one, soft fire, until they penetrate the bone and cut the vein in two areas, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And its sharpness is in the tips of the two handles.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	It is better if the sharpness is in the handles rather than the tips, because if it is too pointed with two handles it will be more proper to each wound, and it won't cut the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some thickness in those areas, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this procedure is better than any other procedure and more efficient.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space which is between the two handles is the thickness of the said (or aforementioned) thing.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of bodies with sharp and acidic humors of the veins.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic humors, and it is the body of those veins which are on the head, and do not confirm any cause for the treatment of medicine, and times the face of the patient is already reddened and felt in the seat of the forehead a certain form of ambulation, as if it were an ambulation of antimony, and the veins of that one are so attenuated, humid so that already the skin of theirs is constricted, and the eyelids are so scratched by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient wise men mixed in the treatment of those of this operation, and I named this treatment with a pause.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to raise the skin where there are wounds on the upper frontal area, and then insert three equal distant slits in the frontal area according to the length of it.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the slit falls into two sections: one slit is equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle area of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the tears which are in two sides, and extend your hand from the continuity of both the jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three fingers.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dried cloth moistened with which to drain the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula between the two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the partition of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape out all the cartilage which is between two incisions around the siphac which is above the bone, and then make that from the middle incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then insert a spatula into this space and in the first incision use another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And push the edge of that sharp instrument through the flesh attached to the cartilage, and the edge of it through the bone, and insert it so that it reaches the middle fissure, and cut off all the veins that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More, let the incision be continued to where the cartilage appears, and then make an incision in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And after that pour out a quantity of blood, squeeze the places of the lumps of congealed blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then push into each hot fissure a piece of old cloth, and place on those enclosed powders made with wine and oil and sharp vinegar, and beware that the applied cautery does not produce an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the ligature and administer a large enema of hot water or tea, and then treat it with a mixture of basilicon and oil and rosewater and other ointments so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending to the heels from the divisions of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When the liver and spleen are inflamed with catarrh and continuous pain, and the veins of the patient are thin and exhausted, and their protection is weak, and their eyelids are ulcerated and their skin is damaged, and in the forehead there is sharp pain and consequent inflammation, then you will know from this accident that the materials and catarrh do not come except from many worn out veins proceeding from the divided parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: that you order the patient to shave their forehead, and make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one in width (and start from the left temple's fissure to the right temple; and let the incision be up to the bone; and stretch out your hand on the sides of the temples which are swollen due to bad chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth and fill between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or with yarn.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strew dust of powder mixed in wine and oil so that it does not foster an apostematic abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the apostema is diminished, then it is time to scrape the bone until new flesh begins to grow, and treat it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and make a plaster from it, and administer it on these wounds of the reborn flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of that which falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral matter or similar to mineral, such as iron and copper, or it is from a plant, such as cedar or lavender, or it is fluxible matter, such as water and sharp vinegar and their equivalents, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when stone falls into the ear or other cause similar to those that do not fit in the ear, and warm the ear with sunlight, and if necessary grind the stone, then distill it with some oil of violet or cypress, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze with condition, and stop the nostrils for fear of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then put in the ear canal some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear to the separated parts, because moist heat is introduced with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not come out, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called fine forceps, whose shape is this:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is extracted with the instrument, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a thin hook of little doubling.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not perforated by that, make a cane of iron and insert the end of the cane into the trachea of the ear and close around the environment of the cane with wax and oil softened so that it does not hurt except the cane.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with your finger strongly, because many times seen with what we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	More if it is not perforated in this manner, then take of alum or of prepared vinegar on which the ears are pressed a small quantity, and place that on the extremity of the vein, and then wrap around that place decently with a poultice.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the trachea of the ear with ease, and then cleanse the ear of humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And then if it is not perforated with all the causes that we have recounted, then you should consider that which appears before as a post or spasm of the apostem or abscess.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of taking that is that you at the beginning sensibly touch the patient's vein sepulchral and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that go between your hands and turn the ear to the divided parts, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear and put the fat of it in the place where it is pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the lunar figure fissure enters into the stone, and the stone is perforated, then you can use an appropriate instrument; and at that hour apply the fissure with velocity, and cure it so that it becomes healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the fatty growths that appear and become inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your initial treatment, then take a subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to him the excision of that growth which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do that when you think that it is already moistened by the vapour of the ear, and put it in several warm applications, and extract it with the nails or with a subtle gesture, or with an incision as has been said before, because the extraction of it is thus alleviated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered into the ear, it happens that the patient uses sneezing with conditioned commencement, and fills his other ear with an old cloth, and throws over that ear where the water is, and if by this it is expelled, well; and if not, then take hot stones and wrap them according to the length of the said, and heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient introduce one of these into the opening of his ear and press on the other side of that part with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been expelled from the body.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been expelled, take some paper or cloth, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the fire until it is burned by the fire.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And also put and take another cloth and do it as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and squeeze that one with a tube so that what is said about the evacuating pipe is fulfilled.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	More in the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small beast, take it out similarly and to its likeness, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large beast which causes pain to the sense of hearing, then administer the extraction with gestures and anointings, and the cause of it is considered lighter than all the other causes that happen in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Moreover in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not confuse your cure, then it is advisable that you expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or with subtle anointings, but if no cause appears, then take a pipe, narrow and wide at the end, whose form is like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can suffer; and suck it strongly with a forceful suction, and make well-observed movements, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If it does not obey your treatment, then block and close the circuit of the vein with wax in the same way as we have said; then administer distilled liquids which the ancients have already proven in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be that with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear, using this instrument of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or of brass, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and placed below.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then it will be as if they are filling what is in the cavity of the vein, where it will be necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and envelop it decently in the extremity of the cloth, and put oil or juice of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines into the vein — which is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with cloth below and press with your hand a tempered compression so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the hearing and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is infiltrated in the ear should already be scaled with a small focus.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause which you distillate in the ear is not too cold, because ear medications do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of obstruction of the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some observed that some infants have non-perforated naval areas, and this also occurs in some men, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a plague or flesh growing in it; and this obstruction sometimes happens in the passage of the ear's duct, which doesn't allow for hearing, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in its passage, which doesn't allow for hearing, is among the major conditions of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you achieve hearing, take care to place the patient's ear in the sunlight and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if you see apparent obstruction, open it with a subtle spatula, of which this is the shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it, in which the width is small, one part is pointed and the other not, and the spatula is of two smooth sides so that it does not make a lesion on the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so if the obstruction is caused by flesh born in the ear or in the middle of it, then apply a subtle and incisive instrument with vehement facility until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the hole of the ear, then take a subtle iron and heat it in a fire for a little while, and place it in the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you have felt the obstruction with the instrument that the patient feels with ease, due to the gravity of hearing, relieve the oppression of it with ease; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place a poultice in the ear, made of wax according to the quantity of the size of the wound, which you have enveloped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take cotton and soak it in vinegar and sprinkle powdered treatise on it and use it; and if the ear has become infected, then remove the poultice and replace it with another one which you will have wrapped in wax mixed with rose oil, until the infection is cauterized; and heal it until it is cured.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	When there is an excessive flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 3.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of a disease that causes inflammation to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil, which causes inflammation to the eyelids of the eyes, sometimes is humid, sometimes is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, hold those in your hands or with your fingers, and cut them away from the roots of their causes, and apply pressure on the affected areas following the treatment.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When there is pain with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those areas with a subtle, lancet-shaped cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is when the incisions and wet wounds return to health once their causes are removed; and when they are cauterized with a hot iron, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of cataract that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Wet spots appear on the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is similar to cataract in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called cataract.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid and underneath.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is what you should consider if the growth proceeds from it in that which appears of the eyelid and is obstructing the entire sight; and the cause of it is laziness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision on that with a lancet, and carefully remove the entire growth with ease until it comes out, and elevate that with a clamp and cut that off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Unless the start of it is not apparent to you, then make a small and gradual incision so that you penetrate the eyelid with a slight cut, for this will not harm in any case.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from that which the angle of it, restoring and fleshing out.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the growth is leaning towards the inner parts of the eyelid, remove it from the surface, then take up the eyelid and with a clamp remove the growth, or if you need to make an incision, press on the entire area, and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, this will not harm in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the treatment, wash the wound with salty water; and cure the area with liquid that promotes healing inside until it is healthy.
Capitol .x.	Head or Chapter
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of the eyelid wound on the underside of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A stye is a grievous thing which is generated in the linings of the lower eyelid, and mostly occurs in children, it aggravates the eyes of those who have it and makes them blind; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because tears are collected in their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this they rub their eyes with their hands for a long time, and they sleep with their hands on their eyes; and the eyelids of their eyes become humid, which already has been covered by inflammation and swelling, and apparent acne in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the hardness inside their eyes.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And a certain method of operation is in that the patient holds his sick head in his hand, and then holds a cloth of linen and of wool, and makes a circle according to the quantity which contains the entire affected area, and then places that on it and presses with the fingers from all sides so that hardness is accumulated in the middle of the circle, and then puts it in the middle of that humid place with spittle incident on the fissure for the width, and the fissure is not larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the press that you find the entire code within which you arrive at the liver, because in the more dispositional processes of the liver it proceeds by fissure according to the form of white gray matter.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that which you have enveloped between the layers of the said parts, and turn it over with your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatulum you do not reach the hole and that you do not touch that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if it does not appear to your liver at the beginning of the fissure, more that you adjust in the fissure a small one with facility until the liver proceeds; and then extract that which we have said; and then submerge the clothes of this in water and wine and place them on the area and strain those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus apply that you sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that it absorbs the remainder of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	More if there appears on the spot a hot aposteme, then heal it with cold plasters until it is healthy.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of manual treatments of the touch of urine.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the urine there are born ulcers that obstruct the natural passages and become inflamed, then those tumors of the urine cause symptoms of illness such as constant tears and softening of the eyelid and web-like tissue, which is a cause of destruction of the urine, which is called touching of the urine, and it is cured in four ways: either with cautery by fire; or with sharp medicine as it will be said in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched with incision and suture; or with canes as I will direct.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then it is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your thigh; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, well; and if not, insert a needle in the one where the faithful thread of the suture is, and make the needle penetrate with the thread from below, and this should be — near the edge of the eyelid where the natural threads are — near the threads, and pull the thread to the divisions above with the eyelid, and turn that one to the correct position.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then put in the inner part of the eyelid, below the obstructed passages, a spatula or a needle to make an incision from the major lacrimal to the minor lacrimal; and then pull out the thread and place below the eyelid a small piece of cotton or cloth, and then apply it to the eyelid with a bandage, and let it be like the figure of a fly's wing.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	More emperor has said that the figure is according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, for that which is diversified in men, for those of them it is indicated that a large quantity is incident on the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then put the spatula over the two lines that you have sewn, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your crack is near the natural skin so as it is the thickness of a kidney.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then put the hook in one of the two corners of the wound, and then excise that entire area, and then adjust with the suture the two lips of the flesh with thread or wire, and remove the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the threads on the eyebrows with some envisioned causes, if you want to do it, and if not, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then cure that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, remove the patch without suture, and cure it with what is excised and constrained, for the eyelid is elevated by the relaxation of the wound and its aggregation; the best suture is minor, and thus I have said to the ancient ones of taxation.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	More emphasis is placed on soliciting the patient, and it is a good operation, and not something to be feared.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manipulation in examination, which is that you make a sign above the eyelid in the shape of a fig leaf, and then lift the eyelid about three inches separated and gathered according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it's not possible to do that, to have the inches, and this is not equalized, then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert one end of the thread near the larger tear duct, and the other end of the thread near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between the ties so that the threads are equal, and then elevate your hand with elevation equally, elevate all the skin over which the sign was made as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and heal that interior area so that it is healthy.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if there occurs an abscess on your incision or your suture, then apply that abscess with wax and to the surroundings, with bandage.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some times it happens to the eyelid that the stitches are converted into scars, therefore be careful when you use in that what we have spoken of about incision; but a suture is in each case more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat gout in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the shape which is defined according to what has been recounted; and then by art make two canulas or two subtle astelas from which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatulum.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the extremities of each partition, where you hold the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add subtly under what is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canulas of each partition with a strong ligature, and leave it for several days, so that the thread will die from the constriction and be denied and will fall out by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is prolonged, then cut the ligature with the scissors, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore when it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not puncture.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method of making two canulas which you make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and neither more nor less in quantity of length and width.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter twelve.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of the elevation of piercing pains in the heel with a needle when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural pains, hard and rough and piercing the heels, then the operation on them is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that weak and thin vein, and then adjust the extremities of the patient and massage each one in a subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the veins be of a quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you combine another subtle vein with it on the patient's arm, and massage the extremities of that one if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then put the patient's sick head in its proper place, and let it be near the window for the sake of your work being declared, for this is a subtle and minor operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has need of ingenuity, and make it penetrate the eyelid gently until you extract that from under the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin from underneath and insert it into the axis, and let the pains be one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand towards it so that the skin is adjusted to the axis on the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the ailment is irritating the elbow and not healing the skin, irritate the elbow on the affected side of the thigh, where you have applied a plaster, until the irritation of the elbow has passed to the upper part.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And apply that to the vision of the wound, for then you will irritate the elbow and the thigh, and wrap each one and close the wound, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the skin adheres to its proper place and forms over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then adjust a long skin from the natural skins, and elevate it to that one, or let it be until it is lengthened sufficiently to occupy the space, and then elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter thirteen.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure of the disease which appears in the lower eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is a disease in the wound, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on its own, either to the right or to the left side, due to poor consolidation of a wound or of a cut or of a cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this contraction is either natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of a wound or of cuts or of cauterizations, or by resemblance to other poorly treated diseases.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	During the operation on him, you should make this consolidation and separate his lips, and place between them a piece of cloth, and tie them so that they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not think that you should use treatment on him for the causes which dry out and constrain, because if you do this it will return to an even worse state than before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on that cause which softens, such as fenugrec, and mix it with water in which the seeds of flax are cooked and crushed, or with a decoction of plantain, which has been dissolved in oil, and submerge the piece in it, and treat it with this.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should penetrate to such an extent that it is not consolidated according to the shape it had at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have spoken of, is nothing but a correction of the ulceration that does not restore the shape of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of ulcers which are made on the eyelids.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ulcer which is made on the eyelids, which is properly called an ulcer; and it is of this some natural, others accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Pain from an injury is caused by a blow or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread penetrates through both extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh to the separated parts with the needle and sew it with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatulum.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And thus if the shape of the eyelid returns to its proper form, well; and if not, take the thread and pass it through the split figure, and with that turn back the eyelid, and make two fissures on the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if the extremities of the two fissures are at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they meet, and let them form an angle where when they come together a figure is formed by them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then stitch the flesh in the amount that is the edge of the needle, next to it, which is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and bind them with a thread of flax; and then treat them with the same things that we have said about softening medicines and poultices, so that they may be healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the eyelid is torn by a tear or suture or cautery, then it is good that you sew with a flat needle on the skin of the eyelid, as has been previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the poultice between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the cure of the eyelid when it is torn or dropped, that runs in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of the eyelid, and this is in the form of diverse poultices.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan always prepares an aid in each manner that is possible for it to make the figure return to its natural form, or near to it, and that patient according to what is convenient for them of the operation and of the instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many men in such a way that the eyelid is solidified next to the white of the eye, and is prohibited from ease of movement and its natural functions, then it is good that you insert the extremity of the tool under the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it towards the corner.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you carefully dissect the adherence with a subtle spatula, which should not be sharpened by the dissections, having obtained a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remain with the spatula that does not touch the vein with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your dissection be such that it excises the adherence with ease, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural form and the entire adherence is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put salt water in the vein, which you will wash with it; or dissolve a little of that substance in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the vein with a thread of linen, and place on the vein a woolen cloth soaked in warm water, and for three days use consolidative treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the dissection of the nail and the protrusion of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is according to two manners, either it is nervous, and is similar to a hard, subtle callus; or it is not-nervous, similar to white congealed humidity, which when the iron touches it, or the tongs take hold of it, it is cut off and the tongs are not fixed to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both eyes do not comprehend except for the larger tear duct which little by little covers the vision and prohibits light and the movement of the wheel.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	More of the method of operating in the incision of it is that the patient holds his head tied up high, and then operates on its heels, and raises the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail with a pair of pincers and extracts it from the divided parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a thread of horse or of ox or of cow, or of similar, or of strong wire, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with wire the nail; and extract it from the divided parts, and strip with the thread the flesh of the nail which is the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow it with the thread to the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you cut the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or with small forked instruments, and separate the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by the incision of it there does not appear continuous flows of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is removed from the sole of the foot, stretched out or held in a vice, as we have said, and then extracted with a curved spatula the tissue of which this is the form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that on the spatula you do not touch the corneal layer and that it enters into the rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then put in the wound a little of crushed salt or fat made from resin, and let it be until the next day; and then treat that with water that is suitable for healing.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed on that toe, then this type of nail is treated with medicines, and is healed in the same way as others, and restored as recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then you open the wound of the patient and take a subtle spatula made from sharpened steel in this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that it is hardened and is confused and the mixture enters into the wound, then distill from your work on the wound made of resin or with hot wax or with crushed salt, and cover the wound until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then place a thread on that operation so that everything that is of it may be removed, unless the contrary happens and an abscess forms in the wound, for which you will leave that, and treat the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then continue your operation on that reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The protrusion of the tear-producing flesh, if it is not in the wound for great discomfort, should be suspended with a bandage; and cut that part from that one side, and do not make the incision so that you do not cut the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a cool cloth to the tear duct and make it sinewy until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of swollen lymph nodes and of that which is born from flesh adjusted in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some growths in the wounds of some people are born from reddish flesh, and it is placed over the pupil, or applied near or pressed on the eyelids and forces the eyelids to shut tightly together at the red border and it resembles the rose of a pomegranate.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	More, the operation on him is that the patient holds his sick head in a tie; and then uncover the wounds of that one and collect all that flesh with convenient bandages for it, and hold it with a forceps or with tongs; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the incision, and beware of the wound that you do not let it escape from your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be the one with which you make those cuts on the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forked instruments with which you collect abscesses according to the shape that will come closest to this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the hole with trisa salt, or distill it into powder and apply it like rouge, along with other corrosive medicines, and place on top a piece of cotton soaked in warm album to ensure the aposteme does not suppurate.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if you suspect some cause of gangrene and it is confirmed by cautious examination, and you fear suppurating aposteme, then cleanse the hole and treat that aposteme with the thing that caused that aposteme, and apply the thread over the operated area until it is healed, and similarly do on the adjusted flesh which adheres to the hole of this special case.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But first make sure that you avoid all cure of the fresh wound by natural or accidental means, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficient for that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Collection of sweat from the ankle.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sweat that comes as red veins which are applied to the ankle and prohibit the movement of the vessel, and they develop the ankle over a length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the ankle in which sweat is, is strong and in it there is no other disease than sweat, then you collect that sweat.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to put his sick leg in this position, and then suspend those veins with an onion or with two, according to your prudence; and let that onion be of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two onions gradually in a container according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then veins are collected with subtle forces, with subtlety, and you extract the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being emptied of the ankle and being relieved.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not touch the ankle with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, be very firm in your operation so as not to cut except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then you distill on the ankle clear wine or red wine for that with sharp acidity it cuts what is collected from the sweat.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	More often if that is not possible to gather everything at that time, then apply a plaster to whatever reduces the pain of it, and leave it for several days until the pain of it is calmed and ensured against apostema or abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And return to it according to the method that the doctor will guide until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the shape of the forearms:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter nineteen.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reduction of fractures to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat a fracture with a cautery or with sharp medicine according to what is previously described and it is not healed, then do not put anything in it except for a dressing on the abscess, and extract all the humidity that is in it and from the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is exposed and there is found in it corruption or blackness, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a rough scraper, and let it be made of iron, and let the head be rounded so that it can scratch, which will be made pointed by sharpening with a file or an aliskalfati for subtle sharpening (such as is in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Stop that on the affected area of the bone, and return it to its proper place among the tendons, and press your hand gently so that you understand that the corruption is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And let some dressings be made, and restore the area with drying and astringent treatments.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the area is consolidated and is covered with good flesh and is separated from the body of the wound and remains for forty days, and is not renewed and is not suppurated and does not happen an accident, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in the skill but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: which is that you discover with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three broths according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the extremity of the iron be triangular, and its point be first sharpened to the extremity thus many times.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And stop that on the bone, and let it be near the tear duct; and move your hand a little to the well, and return your hand with the broths until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels for what is pressing, that it seems to come out as much as you put your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with medicines that dry and tighten, thus as you would apply heat.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the area are hardened, the matter that flows to the parts of the body from the abscess returns to the nose, therefore it is easier to put on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the ankle.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the ankle is swollen in its entirety and does not suffer from pain or diminution, then it is good to massage the patient, and apply warmth, and make scarifications on the neck with suction for a good outcome; and apply a liniment on the ankle made of vinegar and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and apply a plaster on the ankle with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take pieces of flax, many threads, and each piece should be folded in four layers; make from those threads.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then apply those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the ankle needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply on top of those a strong bandage with a tight and firm dressing; and repeat the suction with scarification; and then remove the cupping glasses and keep the ankle straight during the day and the night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	More often the ligament is softened, then it is necessary that it be more stretched.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then put the ligament near the day and night in the same way as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the joint has already been reduced, well, and if not, then apply a plaster with powders and strictures and blisters until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the uvea (or, more likely, "Of the incision of the protrusion of the coat of the
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the coat of the uvea, and then it is prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of rice, and the shape of the man is marred by this, and you want to cut into it, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea on the lower part, and then put the other needle in the double fold of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and let the first needle slide according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double fold and lift with that the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and pull it strongly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and pause over the woolen cloth infused in a white album of liquid, and insert it so that the thread goes into the wound.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal the wound with water that comforts until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some places gather the entirety of the partition with a circle of cloth around the wound adjusted to great prominence, and then be perforated with subtle spatula that comes to the surface of the wound, and clear the whitish moisture, and descend the wound and enter as much.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called ulcer, is not but an abscess which is adjusted in the wound resembling descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	More to the method of operating on it, is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and right seat, and then take the head in your hands from both sides and bind it so that you see the abscess coming to the lower parts, and then be dried and not descend, and be stopped the flow, and the disease sees the causes thus as it seems.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the descent to the healthy state is not prepared with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your thighs and take a subtle spatula and rub it gently on the conjunctiva and cornea in the corner (in the place of the lacrimal gland), until the foreign substance is removed from the eye.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is removed, you distill in a tube hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment of the descending water of the eye, or On the cure for cataracts/eye problems descending from the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which ones it is convenient to pierce, now we will declare that according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then make the patient sit between your thighs on a chair and lift their eye, with a tight bandage.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your left hand near the eyelid of the eye with water, if the water is in the left eye; or your right hand, if it is in the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take your right hand and grasp the left one, if the wound is on the left; or take your left hand and grasp the right one, if the wound is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then pause at the extremity of the left side near the crown due to the thickness of the vein in the white of the wound on the inner part of the tear duct, and then press the left finger with force and turn your hand towards that place.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the wound and feel that the left one has already been pierced due to an empty vein.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And take the measurement of the chamber of the left eye to the size of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the wound through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then pause on the left at the place where the water is, and lift your hand in one motion to another, and thus if the water descends so much, then the patient will see above that which they had looked at before, and also in the following wound.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you will put aside that other step before the left one is touched.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is seated and not descended, then extract the bile with ease, and turn that hand little by little, and dissolve in water a small amount of clear salt of gemstone and wash the wound with that; and place on the wound cotton or stopes or wool soaked in oil of rose and album of urine and tie it with that.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Many of us and those who are of our time place on that a truss of album of urine.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey your bile to enter the wound due to its hardness — for it is one of the hardest things that the wound has, and a motive for men — then take the spatula, which is named albucid, of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint, and do not push your hand through the hole, and it is not so that you should make a way for the bile to the subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then introduce the bile as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And give the complement of your work, let the patient be prepared in a dark and quiet house, where they sleep on their side with two in attendance, and let them be prohibited from all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place in the nature of it that water by which its nature is cleaned, and do not move their head to the right or left part at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligament according to its disposition enter the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then dislodge that thing from the dark and foul-smelling mass, and make visible the hidden sight, and make him see some causes, and then return the ligament into the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not attempt to do this at the hour of treatments or at least until the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Be careful that you administer this so that the water may gently pass through with great and vehement regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If a postrema or abscess occurs, then be careful to dislodge the ulcer before the seventh day, and correct that which has caused the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you will absolve the sight of it and place upon the face of its mouth for which the evacuation of it is regulated, it exists in the dark mass for some days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let it be extracted from that mass gradually and investigated into its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in such a case the disciple of vision is not excused from some visits, and then you will be skilled about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has reached us from some of those who are at the Artach, and some have said that fire is made in the Ayraq, a perforated magma through which water flows.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Maybe the emperor has not seen it in our land, which would have perfected this, nor is it legitimate according to some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of remedies by which it will be applied to those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or of steel properly, and the extremities of theirs are to this subtlety triangular, the extremity sharp thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the healing of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths adapted from which some cause is assembled with the tail of a fish called polyp, or a polypus; and this sickness is called polypus for its resemblance to that fish represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is flesh that is cancerous, rough, of dark color; and of it is flesh that is not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these flesh growths not deceitful nor cancerous, it is good to make the sickness seep between your hands and put it in the sun, and breathe into its nostrils, and prick the tissue once in those growths.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the divided parts of the flesh, and then dissect what you have comprehended of those with sharp subtlety of one part within which you know that all the flesh is already removed; for if it remains of it a cause of which the removal is possible, then you will use one of the subtle instruments with ease within which from its removal a cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	More often if the wound is bloody or acidic with an aposteme (or ulcer), then stop that which flows; or if it's one of the malignant ulcers, then touch and cauterize that within which there will be separated blood and all the cavities will be removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let it be put into the nose, a mixture of vinegar or wine and water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is opened and its process humidity enters the palate, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that the flesh is nothing in the purulent ulcers of the nose's bones to which separation has not been achieved.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore it follows that you will put a thread of linen to which some thickness is added, and knot the thread with knots, and place between each knot the quantity of the said or measured, and anoint the patient and put one end of the thread in the nose with a straw or another instrument by which it is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And then it is made so that the aura is generated, which attracts the upper odor to the point where it penetrates the channels of the nostrils, and it is ejected over the upper throat, because repeated vomits seem to be the cause of this action for the schools, and it is a legitimate reason for one who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause with the two extremities of the vein, one extremity that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a closure of flesh to the nodes that are on the vein, and make it so that you know that the flesh is already at the nodes of the vein.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the vein, and pause on the nose with the abstraction of blood a little, and make it so for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is rotten of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, put in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	More if there are signs of recovery that appear, make use of that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head which causes distilled oils and medicines to be in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or of copper, which is similar to a small covered lamp, thus like a small funnel, and the middle similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed cane like a reed, and the handle of the instrument should be at the top, flat and uncovered; on which you should put a hand in the back of it, with which you hold that which you extract from it, or that which you want from its juices and sucked causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this top part is precious: take a recipe of castor oil, white henna, ginger, and a pinch of saffron, long pepper, skinkus, and petum of spice one ounce, mixed with juice of beets and cabbage, and make into pills, and let one pill be dissolved in warm water, and give it to the patient sitting in a leaning position.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the ulcers born on the outer extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Ulcers born on the outer extremities of the nose are called green ulcers, and are treated and anointed for several days during which time one must guard oneself from it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason you should write that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and inherit all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then apply a cauterization or medicine that burns to the area where it was, or a treatment in place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed until it becomes swollen, then consider if it is hardened, of dark color and with little sensation, do not touch that part with iron for fear of causing an aposteme or cancer; because many times this has been seen to happen to one who performs this incision, due to great malice upon the one on whom it was performed.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of a yellowish touch and not of dark color, and at times when incision is possible on the entire thing, then evacuate the patient and perform the incision without fear, and treat the area with that which expels and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by a wound or by similarity.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	It is known that when there occurs a solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, little confidence is placed in that operation except by some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you come upon some cause of these, consider if it is a fresh wound with good blood, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and carefully treat that area until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you extract each part of its own mucous membrane until healthy flesh appears.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture and strengthen them, and on top of them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and crushed tristicum, and place on the powder a piece of plaster or another consolidating plaster, and leave that poultice on for two or three days, and then remove it and change the plaster and leave it on until the wound is scarring and the edges are separated, and then heal with ointment until it is healthy.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity to the edge as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided teeth.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Some swollen nodes appear on the divided teeth of their lips, some abscesses similar to grass of oats, and some of them are minor and some are major.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should convert the lips and wounds each one of those hardnesses of the whole part, and then with the abscess drained, fill the place with tristicum powder so that the blood is restrained, and then wash with warm water and treat the place with what is stipulated, until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Gather the excess flesh over the adjusted gum, which the ancients called albulus, and see that you suspend or hold that one with a forceps or clamps, and make an incision in that place, and let the blood flow or the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply a dressing on the wounded location, either with astringent powders or excitative ones.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the root of rotten teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth that are divided, separated, and in the gums that are adjusted, scorched, rough, and some growths are blackened and made citrine or green within which the gum is seen to be corrupted and the loose teeth are decayed.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then see that you make the patient sit between your knees and place their head on your thigh, and examine the teeth in which those roughnesses and causes of bad appearance appear, like sand within which no cause of harm remains, and this comes from blackness and citrinity and other things that are deformed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if the blockage is in the beginning of the digestive process, that's what it is; and if not, then you will pass the digestive product through the other days and to the second and third intestine until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have need of various shapes and forms of mallets according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the mallet with which the tooth is extracted from its partition is different from the mallet with which it is extracted between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of mallets should be prepared by you, whichever ones you will see:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter thirty.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you treat the tooth of its pain with all skill and delay in the entire extraction of it, because it is not a trivial cause that should suffice to remove it when it is eradicated, because it is a subtle substance involved in the excuse for the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Before you attempt to extract the tooth from the patient, you should be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because many times the pain deceives the patient and they think it's in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain doesn't cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you have certified what the aching tooth is, and what you know to be, then seek out in the circuit of the tooth with spatula in which some virtue is, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gum of the entire part, and then rub that one with the fingers or with subtle fork at the beginning small by small until that congeals.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then put in the strong tongs holding for good eloquence or strong structure, and place the head of the patient between the teeth that you hold so that it does not move, and pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and put that under the entire part with facility and effort, to ease the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is damaged or decayed, then seek that you fill with cloth that hole and tighten it at the extremity of a subtle thread so that it is not torn in the hour of your construction over it, holding it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And seek that you open with excavation in the circuit of the entire part of the gum and guard with your strength that you do not break it and rend and tear a part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is less than the primary pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not perform what ignorant and arrogant barbers do in their pretension and boldness regarding the eradication of it, which they do not administer as we have recommended; because many witnessed things bring about great maladies in men, which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of them are all or some of them, or that you extract that with some bones of the jaw, as many witnessed things have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the eradication of it, let the mouth be washed with six or seven bitter salts.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is an efflux of blood through the mouth, as many witnessed things have shown, then sprinkle a certain quantity of ashes and dust on the wound, and if that ash does not work, apply cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tongs should be subtle with which the tooth is pulled at the beginning being of long extraction, with a short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you have to work with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let them be like this, of thick handle between so that when you grip them they are not bent, but rather short and slender.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of Indian iron, well-made and slender, and in the slenderness of those let there be teeth which one enters into the other and grips with strong construction, and some witnessed things, the slenderness of those is the shape of a bird's beak, which has the name ciconia, that is guanta, and are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter twenty-one.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from fractured jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is fractured due to some cause, then it is advisable that you apply a poultice on the area with a bandage for a day or two until the area becomes softened; and then insert the handle of the tongs or forceps, the extremities of which are assembled at the beak of a hook called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them should be made like a file or a rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey to your efforts with these forceps or tongs, then it is advisable that you cut into the root and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument which has the name "atali", which is a small lever the shape of which is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be of brief extremity, thick and not bent so that it is not fractured.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if by this the root is cut through, well and good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which the following are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at the extremity in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a subtle, pointed extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus helped with this instrument having two grooves of which this is the shape suitable for the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which I will describe in the scraping of teeth; because it is made with this instrument which is assembled to a large file, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular pointed extremity, whether twisted or short, which should have some thickness, and not be sharpened so that it is not scratched.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for the teeth are moved thus and similarly the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan in the art, finds for himself according to what it means for the operation and various ailments; because there are ailments for which the ancients did not make or even think of a proper instrument, due to the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is fractured, or if it is broken, then weigh carefully on that location with what is convenient for the instruments and the forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with the gesture of which this is the shape:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be on the opening a small, gradually increasing tightness, and let it be constricted or held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the whole bone is fortified; and then restore the area with medicines suitable for this condition.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small perforation in the bone, then take away that part of the decay and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of teeth that protrude above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth protrude not according to their natural body, in that case the form is flawed, and especially when it happens to women, and especially to venerable old ladies; therefore I advise you to consider: if a tooth has no contact with another tooth, and there is no possible arrangement or alignment of it, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument, the shape of which is like this; and it should be made from Indian steel, extremely sharp.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be the one with which you cut it, for several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and let it not be sharpened by another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if there is an eminent stone that appears in the bile, then clean it with a file made of iron from India, of which this is the form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of iron from India and with an edge; and let it be with many small points, like a file, with which the needles are made, with which the tooth is cleaned little by little over many days with ease, so that there is not another tooth that grows and falls.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then anoint that end with a bandage, and give it to the patients to lick.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is loose and the tongue touches it, then make sure that you smooth out the roughness so that the splinter of that fraction is hidden and swallowed, and is pressed down so that the tongue does not wound it and the speech is not corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the teeth in front are knocked out by concussion and removal through percussion or extraction, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with medications that dry up the area, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that nothing is cast into those that are strengthened with gold wire and not silver, because silver becomes black and immediately turns to powder after a few days, but gold in no time is changed.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the thread be of such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the thread and take double its length between two healthy teeth, and then tie knots with two twists of the thread between two molars, or one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then pull the suture back to the part where you started, and hold your hand with ease and skill so that it is not bitten.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your tightening be such that you hold the thread between the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess threads with forceps or scissors, and add them to each place as needed, and hide them between the healthy tooth and the molar, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave that thus tightened like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, hold it or them with another thread in such a manner for all the time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two molars, thus with these threads tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one or both teeth are returned to their proper place in the jaw, and the tissues are reconnected as we have recommended, and the gums recover.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not do this unless you are skilled and knowledgeable.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some bridgework is made from the bones of a cow, and is shaped like a tooth, and is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and is tightened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter thirty-four.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which comes with the tongue sometimes is natural to man, or is accidental and happens by a wound which has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, their head being held firm in your tie; and you lift their tongue, and then cut the nervous ligament according to the width by which the tongue is bound.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this has been caused by the consolidation of the wound, then you cut and divide it by the width through which you have cut the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there is not made a fissure in the press of the flesh and that you separate the artery here and come blood flux.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the vestiges of the incision with warm water or wine or cold water; and then put a clean cloth on it, which is the method by which you hold the patient's tongue in each wound so that it is not consolidated into another ulcer.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	More often if blood flux happens, put on the place a burnt and crushed verdigris; more often if the blood comes out, then cauterize the place with a broad and flat cautery that is convenient for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Certain ulcers happen on the tongue, an aposteme similar to a small wound, hindering the tongue from its natural operation; and so it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient sitting in front of you and examine the aposteme.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient has no feeling, then do not touch that which is cancer.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it declines to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then put the ankle in a poultice, and cut that with a subtle spatula, and cut from the entire affected part; and if blood comes out during the time of your operation, then stop the bleeding immediately, so that the blood is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work, until you have treated it with a complement of wine and vinegar and salt; and cure it with another cure adapted to that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter thirty-six.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of abscesses from both ears and of that which is born in the throat and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there is a swelling in the throat, then there are glands that are gathered together, which protrude outward and are called ears, which when you treat with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron because of the flow of blood; let it be until it is matured, and then you will operate on it, or it will break by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, redness, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what is thought to be the onset of the disease.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is what you consider, during your operation, if the apostema has already been treated with a complete or partial cautery; and then examine the patient in the sunlight, and let their head be in a raised position, and open their mouth, and the servant should hold between their hands to press the tongue of the patient with an instrument of noble movement, from which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or copper, and let it be subtle as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Then when you press on that tongue and it shows you the apostema, and you see above it the raised vein, then take the needle and put it in the amenal, and pull it to the outer parts from there as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or also that which you pull out, some cause of the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, such that the orifice of each one of them is in the hollow of the other, with sharp edges, which should be of iron or forged.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at your present, then describe that spatula from which this is the shape of: And be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have made an incision, make the other according to this same method of incision, and apply the incision to the patient's wound with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is an efflux of blood, apply water from the decoction of the seed of milgrana or of the leaf of mirtra and similar to that for stopping causes, so that the flow of blood is restrained, and treat that which is sick.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And some abscesses appear in the groin or other swollen parts, and incise those according to what was said and written about the incision of two similar swellings.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman for an abscess which had formed in her groin, the abscess was of a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the groin, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she would have been near death if the treatment had been delayed by one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already pushed so much that it had formed two openings between which a pus flowed out through two channels.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut through the flesh and put my finger in one of the openings, and pulled it out, and a large amount of pus was thrown out from him, and I made an incision in the other opening to meet with the first one, and I forced open his mouth, and compressed his tongue, and then I put my finger in the opening into the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut out a large part of it, and there didn't flow much blood from it except for a little bit.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore the abscess of that woman was completely removed, and she began to drink water, and then took a diet, therefore I did not see any more discharge from that abscess for a long time, and another abscess formed in its place, which discharged between the space where it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I applied an iron and cauterized the abscess of it, then a fire came from the application; and then I walked around and did not know what God would do with that woman.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the discharge of the umbilical cord when it becomes abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the fever is high in the uvula, and it's swollen and long, it's called perpendicular; and if it's in the area of the throat and it's thick and round, then it's called bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	More often when it's cured with what we've said in the division, and not conflicting with your cure, and especially if several times the aposteme is cauterized and it's subtle, then beware that you incise what is accumulated around; and if it's to that length, and it's bloody, of dark color or black, and not in its center, then beware that you touch the incision of it, for there is fear regarding the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the method that has been said about its whiteness and length, you should seize the patient and press their tongue with an instrument which processes its shape and return the nail to the new moon, and pull it down and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two molars.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware that you do not incise it except what is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, for if you incise more of it, you will damage its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the incision, using the same one that we have recommended in the incision of two sides, and cure that which is inside until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision, it is good to use art in the cauterization so that fear is removed, and the handling of the cautery on them is not but with sharp water, and it is that you put the head of the patient in a high place, and then press the tongue of theirs with the instrument that we have mentioned, and then take from the water which we have spoken of in the chapter on cauterization, and soak this cloth vividly, and apply this not rough nor subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extraction of the cavity in which the medicine is put be like the cavity of a scorpion's tail, and put the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer, and the patient will spit on the other side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of theirs can come out through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any bad effect on their throat and so that it loosens that one.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then put your hand with the medicine, and express it on the uvula for half an hour until it becomes diminished and soothed by the absorption of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you desire, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the arm, and submerge the cloth in medicine, and insert the arm with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to the tube, and make this action as many times as necessary until you obtain what you want from the cauterization of the humors, and then apply a plaster to it so that it dries and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you indicate that the medicine should be repeated, repeat it, and apply the cauterization externally in the circuit of the humors with cloth wrapped in bandage, and cleanse what is in the circuit of the body from the medicine, and wash with cold water, and cure with an embrocation, and treat with gargling until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of cure is more safe than incision and less fearful.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some weaknesses are cured in the humors with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calament, ysop, origanum, rue, arabic scammony, camomile, and other herbs similar to these, and adjust all or some of these causes into a woolen cloth, and submerge them in hot water, and boil; and the cloth should be washed decently, and in the middle of the cloth there should be a hole, on which an instrument made of silver or metal according to this manner is placed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the uvula over the tonsil, until the uvula is sufficiently moistened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then spread it on those moistened spots until it's dry, and beware that you don't perform this treatment at the onset of an abscess, because too much adjustment would be harmful to the abscess, and it's not suitable for you to do this, but rather you should refer to the declaration of the abscess by its cauter.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	Unless the instrument is not present to you, then take a cane and place in the extremity of the patient a knot of yarn, so that the mouth of the patient is blocked, because the knot of yarn prevents the vapor from entering the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres to the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Moistened spots adhere to the throat or a thorn in the foot or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore it is necessary that you extract that which is apparent from those things, on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument under the tongue alone, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if that which does not appear is hidden in the throat, it is because you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, since the cause attached to the throat will be expelled by vomiting; or the patient should take a piece of soap or of root of laytuga or a dried fig; or take a piece of dry marine sponge and tie it strongly with a thread, and give it to the patient to swallow, so that when it reaches the place where it is spit out and extracted, then it will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take a worm and tie it with a thread, and let it be put in and extracted immediately; or take a rat and immediately extract its liver and immediately draw out the intestines.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if it is not expelled with those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be thick enough to enter a small opening, and in the extremity of it be enclosed what you will insert into the throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the patient's head upwards, and beware of touching the bone of the throat, so that it does not injure the body or puncture the bone or the spine, or that the doctor puts his hand on it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	More often it happens that the patient inserts their finger into the affected area, by the knowledge of the place of the adjacent cause and feels it from below, and pulls their hand with the instrument on top, all of this according to the quantity which is prepared for them until it is expelled.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood associated with the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the throat is treated with blood in the way that we have spoken of in the division of the cure with medicines and not with confectures, then consider the throat of the patient to the sun, since you have comprehended the tongue of them with an instrument which you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the blood, extract it with a small pinch or with subtle and decent gestures.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and place in the cavity of the cannula an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the blood is stopped and removed from the throat) and abstain the patient from water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full pitcher of cold water, and put the patient's mouth in it, and wash their mouth with it; and do not swallow any of this water for any reason, but rather spit out the water an hour after, because as soon as the blood senses the cold water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	More often if the patient is not previously prepared with what we have recommended, then subject the patient to steam or to a poultice made with the instrument that we have recommended in the steaming of the palate.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Make that, which is in four courses.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another manner of operation in the steaming of that, which you take a bowl in which are ignited coals and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and let the extremity of the instrument be composed in that hole; and apply it from below to the steam; and put the patient's mouth on the extremity of the pipe, and close their mouth so that the steam is not wasted until you know that the steam has reached the blood, because the blood as much flows.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it doesn't work, then repeat the steaming many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and make them eat salty and bitter foods, and don't drink water, and it is necessary that with this regimen the patient be prepared.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it resembles a forceps as many times, except that it is in some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The one that is placed on the pillow, and the extremity of it resembles a beak of a cicada, which is a gouty tumor, in which there is an accumulation of lime, for this reason, when we press upon some cause, that one does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which there is the sum of the serum in perception of abscesses and in section of their discharge.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses show special symptoms, of various kinds, according to what we recall about them, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and discharge of them through two methods, of which one is for the species of abscesses in themselves being treated; and for that which we comprehend of the humidities.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is proper for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that happens in the head is different from the abscess that happens in the buttocks; and the abscess in a fleshy place is different from the abscess in a joint; and each one of them is judged by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And among abscesses there are some which it is advisable that they not be perforated but rather waiting for the maturation of the blood in them or the completion of it.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other abscesses that are formed when they are pierced, and not matured according to their nature, like abscesses that are applied to the joints, because an abscess is applied to a joint, its substance is prolonged until it has consumed what is in its circuit, and it has corrupted the ligaments or nerves of that joint, for which it is made cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess proper to a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, it will harm the principal member; or it is proper to the anus, therefore perforate what is not matured; and it is not necessary to perforate the crude, of undigested digestion, but that which is proper to the anus, so that it does not press on its bottom and is elongated to the inner parts of the anus, and a fistula is made, or that which is made in the term of it which is not sanitized.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and also when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that it is matured when there is a reduction of the pain and a cessation of the fever, and also a decrease in swelling and pulsation, and a sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And where it is necessary that you know the perforation cauterizes in the place of the abscess and of the pus coming from the treatment of the prominent area.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the cauterization is done through the depth of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the place of the arteries, of the nerve cords, of the tendons; and, finally, in all hidden places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use cauterization according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you delay the cauterization until digestion is confirmed according to the compliment, as we have said; for if you cauterize it at that time, it prolongs the body of the pus and increases its foulness, and forces out the lips of the wound which become hardened and increases the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses are cauterized according to the thickness of the flesh or body depending on necessity, or according to that which the affected member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary that you administer small cauterization, and in large abscesses a large and wide cauterization or several incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other symptoms of the abscesses in which it is believed that the gland is affected and inflamed, when it is made thus with bread and made in term that it already starts to suppurate, just like that which occurs in cases of swelling and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those it is in which is incised thus as the figure of a leaf of mint, thus as the abscesses of the glands.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them in which is administered a round section and a crescent-shaped section, similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More, that one which does not fit thus as are abscesses, being superficial, it is believed that you should puncture it with a superficial puncture, or just flatten it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is believed that when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you should puncture it and not be concerned that you extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a portion from it, and then apply a poultice to the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger portion, and then do this several times according to the gradual process until it is completely evacuated.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of fragile virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit is resolved with the evacuation of the pus, and for this reason it dies, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter with great caution, and approach your perforation in which you make these apostems, considering that you clean the wounds and see if the wound of the apostem is small, or is a flat section, then you administer poultices of lime or of hot cinders; and if the apostem is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then consider that you apply a plaster on each hole so that they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the apostem a part of the skin is cut off or has been hollowed out in the circuit, then consider that you fill it with hot cloth or with yarn made from linen thread, as when you treat ulcers or wounds, its humidity; and bind it for three days; and approach the process and cure it with what is necessary to anoint until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Moreover if a flow of blood occurs at the time of your operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in the places where you apply a linen cloth, and place it over the area of the abundant and visible bleeding.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	Moreover if the flow of blood persists, then consider that you administer treatment and cure with powders which have been recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	More often if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of nervous motion, then you should apply poultices of warm oil and cauterized wool, and put them on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should apply poultices soaked in water and oil or in warm wine and oil, and all this should be applied with friction for three days, as we have said, and then you should open the abscess and clean it and administer the treatment that is suitable for the patient.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction I have already spoken of all abscesses in which manner the way of cure is by chapters singularly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter twelve.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the nape of the neck small abscesses form, and they are species of knots that contain tunics that are made for them; and the species of them are moved.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come pimples, and from those comes what contains humidity resembling slime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those which contain humidity resembling pus, and resemble them; and from those which are lapidous, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since the extraction of those does not cause irritation of the arteries.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you press those with an instrument the shape of which goes near to them, which is called entromes, while you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if that which it contains is humidity, then cut that one with a section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section from line B to line G. Then when the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that which contains the humidity, and do not leave any of that cause of all, for if many times seen, it returns, if it remains from that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge the cut in Egyptian gum, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it until another day, for the corrosion of all that is rough from that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply again on that cut the Egyptian gum secondly and thirdly if it is needed, until you confirm that there is no roughness from any cause of that membrane; then cure the wound with the gum until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise that section in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I make an incision in the shape of a cross, and put forceps between the two lips of the incision and cut out the entire affected part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	More often if your skill makes a counteraction, then do what you have recounted as the primary remedy.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the abscess that is to be incised and cured according to what you have said; and an incision over a healed abscess is considered lighter, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men, in whom there is absolutely no humidity; this causes that you should not incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and probe the abscess as a dull, rough, white stone, which cannot be pierced, and if you were to touch it with a pustule, it would become a plague.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in the other accidental abscesses on the head this is not the subject of this chapter, such as the abscesses that come to the heads of infants and from the roots of the ears, but the incision of all these should be a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	Pause the perforation of those from the lowest part of their back so that the body of the blood is alleviated to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And properly cure those with what is convenient for that treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofula which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many swollen gatherings appear as these abscesses in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin areas; and some gatherings occur in the other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and there are many that are generated among them, and all of these scrofula have their own proper tunic, and thus like the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofula are many, for some of them are gouty, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you find in good condition in the Touching, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the codena, and it is mauled to all part, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not deep, so that you make an incision in the superficial scythe of the upper part to the lower part of the body of the line of G. between the line of B., and cut that from all part, and stretch two lips of the codena to one ounce, or to many ounces if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is of utmost caution that the vein or nerve is not injured.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatulum not be pointed, so that it does not touch your hand with incision, or disturb the patient, and incise only what is necessary to incise; for if you were to incise a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then apply to the wound vitriol or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and lay on it a dressing that will reduce the acuteness of the apostema and soften the wound and begin to be purged.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation that you have begun.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine the diseased tissue to see if there is any cause of the other small tumors or scrofula, and cut out those and cleanse those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, beware that you do not cut that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Take care that you tie that wound with a strong and double-folded bandage, and leave it so that it does not fall off by itself for fear of harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old oil, which you have already mixed with Egyptian ointment, and heal it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out the entire hardened scar tissue, then make sure you adjust the edges of the wound and cauterize as much pus as possible so that no excess remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that excess remains due to the size of the scrofula, make sure you understand how to cut out the root of it, and extract it and administer a suture and what is called a dressing.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation there where you see the place of maturation, and make a perforation of what will be the lowest part of the pus, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer a perforation, and apply a plaster or ointment similar to those, so that it cuts away what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound is already cleaned, then treat it with a plaster of generated flesh so that it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the section of the pilum of the accidental apostema in the throat.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients said this section was in the pilum, and none of our countrymen have seen that it was done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More often in men there is a tendency to avoid the extraction of the splinter, as if it is not done gently then all the veins and main ones of the patient will be damaged.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	More often in those who have abscesses or cuts on the mouth or throat or two ears, when the disease is not in the cane, it is good to use the section of splinter to flee the loss which is made by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore it is good when we want to do this, that we make the splinter with three turns of the circles of the splinter, or four with a small section for the width in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section should be in the ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of blood of it are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, then it is good that he stretches the cord of the throat with an onion, and then cuts the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoids the veins of blood if possible to prevent any harm.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then cut the ciphac according to what we have recommended; and it is indicated regarding the section of the canal by the weakness which is from that exit with what is from its disruption and by the abscession of the mouth.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	The wound has been open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is reached in which the perforation is feared, apply two lips of the scab on the wound, and sew that alone with the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended is not an exposition but rather to show that some of these apostems have already closed the throat of the patient, and the patient has come near death, and their breath is between cuts, and some will fall into the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the place of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command to leave the open wound until the evil of the illness is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and then I command to dress the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And this that I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in the throat of a man and fell into a part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to its cure, and I touched the pulse as is customary for the dying, and I uncovered the wound and I touched the blood which was coming out of the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it was confessed that no vein or ligament had been injured, and the wound was from an ulcer, which should be cured before the focus is healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not hasten to serve if it does not arrive at the vault, and then for some days return to the consideration of its own dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the removal of the splinter there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the incision regarding the abscess which occurs in the throat from before, and it is called throat hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called throat hernia is a large abscess according to the body's color, and it dies in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one, it is not necessary to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat knots, and the other manner is similar to an abscess which is made by obstruction of an artery, and in that one there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not attempt to make pressure on it with iron except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe it and investigate it with the aforementioned, and if you find it similar to a fat knot, and it is not suspended on any of the veins, then you incise it in the same way as knots, and extract it from the thing that contains the pus and wash; and if not, then it is written that the whole essence, and then treat the area with what is necessary for cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter twelve.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section of the species of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the knots, some species and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And I will show you the difference between a knot and an abscess with a clear explanation.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that with an abscess there is heat and fever and vehement pains until the ebullition of the surplus is sedated; and it is a completed putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a knot there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that hip or hernia which is in its own sack.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cyst and is made thus as a vacuity, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, which are either fat or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore I say, when you approach the cure of a knot, that you explore and inquire into its beginning with the instrument which is called an introducer, according to how its shape will be found in the chapter which is appropriate for this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	It is the technique of inquiring about abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you find humidity in the abscess, and you will turn the thumbs of the patient little by little so that you know that the instrument has already penetrated the abscess.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then put your hand according to the size of the abscess, and extract the inserted part and consider what comes out from the remains of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you will cut it with a superficial incision according to what has been said about other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the remains of the insertion there is no humidity, then you will know that it is a fatty tissue.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And cut above it with an incision having the shape of a cross according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	thus as you have been taught, and suspend that with a hook, and scratch the abscess from all parts with ease, and if possible, place a dressing or bandage over it, and extract that liquid from the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that liquid, and you will see bits of tissue coming out, and then you will extract it with tweezers until none of it remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If of the fluid a small or excessive amount, the knot returns according to the size.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a small part of the fluid is retained, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place a cauterized plaster on it, and cure that which needs another internal treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the knot is large, then sew the two lips of it and cure it with that which will make it heal together.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	Mostly if the pulse is at the opposite, or not pulsing, then touch and fill the place of the third vein that is varnished and apply a tight bandage for two days or three until the wound closes and the swelling of the blood subsides; and then return to separate that which is the matter of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instrument necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species, that some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small introductions is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Made of iron, with a plentiful flow, of decently purified extremities, so that the instrument is introduced into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are called forceps, and one of them is called a clamp.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And it is of three species, four of which are large, medium and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large clamp, its shape:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium clamp, its shape:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small clamp, its shape:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is suitable that they be used for those abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and buboes, so that among those there are of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made rough, thick, long, as big as large needles on which the threads are sewn, and they are made of brass wire, or of iron, or of silver, And the best ones are those made of brass wire.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the clamps are made of black lead, which it is fitting that for those the ulcers be covered in the concavity of which they are reflected, that they be reflected with their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	It is taken from three species, where some of them are long, and of the others are medium, and of the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of a large experience with lead: 
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the experienced plumber's weight or mass.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the small experienced lead or plumber's form, possibly referring to a mold or shape made from lead for
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the ankle joints are of many special kinds, for some of which are simple ulcers, to which there is only a curvature, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their ankles or joints, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those that have two curvatures in the ankles, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of their ankles that have three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these things are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple ankle joint, its shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a medium simple ankle joint.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple ankle joint, its shape:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large dislocated ankle.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a medium dislocated ankle, its shape:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small dislocated ankle, its shape:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large ankle joint having two curvatures.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium ankle joint having two curvatures.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small ankle joint having two curvatures.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large abscess having three openings:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a medium-sized abscess having three curves or bendings:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a small abscess having three curves or bendings:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and the abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, namely large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of a medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which a cut is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and not placed in such a manner, but rather so that it can be done gently in the scraping of the nodes, the fear of cutting a vein or a nerve, and for this reason the patient is healed and retrieves tranquility, a little at a time, for the adjustment which it finds from the scraping of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the emollients, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large poultice or plaster:
Forma de magda migier:	Shape of a medium poultice or plaster:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of few maggots:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Signs made of real matter and similar to royal authority by which it is made, Alcofol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the extremity of the affected point hidden with occulted spit and in that body towards the divided and deformed parts, when you wish, thus as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spitings, which are found among the words of the perforation of abscesses and do not perceive the ailments, and they are of three species: great, medium and few.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those things:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of flatulence by which the flow of blood is separated, and they are of three species: great, medium and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Signs made of citrus, round with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is seen that these species of flatulences are your large, medium and small ones, because through them the flow of blood is separated with velocity in necessity, and then when at first it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, I do not use them to separate blood in every part of the body, and I do not use them except in fleshy places, thus as in the flesh of the legs and thighs, and in the flesh of the arms, and of the breasts, and of the belly and of the groin, and similar to these, the fleshy humid places.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And certain veins are made by those small surgical instruments that resemble scissors, according to this form; through which the blood is separated when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And certain veins are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Certain veins become swollen, the breasts of certain men receive the complement of sleep when they start to be hairy, and then the breasts become swollen, and the breasts are similar to those of women, and we call them romantic and weak.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who has that, it is necessary to make an incision on the affected area with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then remove all the grossness, and then fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and then join the two lips of the wound with suture, and cure the one inside until it is healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude so much that it approaches that of women, then it should be divided into two parts, one above the other, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each of which is contained within the other up to the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line B to line G. And then remove the skin that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders, whatever is necessary for the cure until it is healthy.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which must be cut due to the anxiety of the patient, and due to the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive ointment and apply it to that area which the corrosion eats away, which is the root of the gout, and properly cure that area which must be healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the species of scrofula, and boils, which contain a pea-sized sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity it is necessary to cut with a lunar incision according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill the wound with warm oil and apply it to the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then let the wound be treated and cured with a suitable ointment for that, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of knots and scrofula, then cut above that as we have said in the section about scrofula treatment.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the wound has extended to the point where it becomes putrid, then administer the cautery according to what we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section on abscesses that occur through either artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken, and the cord that is above it is consolidated, then putrid abscesses occur, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscesses are caused by the artery or vein: for when an abscess is in an artery, it is long and accumulated in the limb of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the vein.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is in a vein is near the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this abscess is an error, especially in those who have them near the shoulders, and in the arms, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; it is very dangerous, therefore it is necessary that its treatment with iron be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about the one that comes from flow due to inflammation of the artery's orifice, cut into the cord section in the limb; and then open the section with knives and then the artery, and make an incision through the tunics so that it may be discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put the needle on that thread and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the ligature with double fidelity in two places, — which causes you to extract excess humors from the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then prick the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that the blood comes out of it, and let the abscess be dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer care in the place where pus is generated so that the ligaments fall, and cure it with an ointment convenient for that, so that it will be healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to a cut vein, then take care that you hold with your hand the place of the abscess near the cord, and put the needle through the area where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread so that you extract from the other side, and tie the abscess with a good ligature as has been said to you in the ligature of the uva, of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then put the thread in that needle, passing through all the abscess except the point of entry of the needle, and tighten the ties in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in the middle place of the entry where it is located, and when you exit, remove the excess of the dressing, and leave what is tied to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a poultice on it that has been submerged in wine and oil, and administer the cure that is made with warm plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter one of the abscess which occurs due to a twisting of the nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus how an abscess occurs in the artery and in the vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs from their percussion or from excessive labor, and from similarities.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made worse by it in the places of the joints or of the heel, or in any place where the articulations are flexed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the worst of its conditions six of them and when it is constricted with inflammation, one feels in it the patient's similar stupidity.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that collects in the front of the body, and for this reason the dressing is applied, and it is flexed to one side and does not go to the parts either before or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is not advisable for that which is in the joints to be enclosed with iron, because a strong contraction of the tendons would ensue.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Pain in the head or forehead makes one spit with the spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a mild abscess, then apply that to the sores and cut away that which is rotten.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excavate that, and apply a plaster to that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of abscesses which occur in the belly and which occur in the intestine.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	We find some homes with moist wounds in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those people who are called funguals due to similarity with fungi, whose root is subtle and the head of which is thick; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its belly there were two fungi-like things, which were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with a small root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inward and they split, and humidity flowed from that all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I put splints on them and wrapped one foot with eighteen inches, and the other with six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation on the incision of theirs is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the pus is white, humid, with subtle reason; then you put the splints with a broad spatula, and be in your presence cauteries at the focus, for four repeated motions the section of it is expelled with much blood; and if the blood comes out, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is pale and fearful, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a fresh made lead plaster, and strengthen it on that wound, the handling of which is what we have said; and apply that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the narrowness of the thread of lead; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large amount of lead on the wound, until it is separated and falls by itself through its own effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the wound is of thick reason, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you should incise the bladder of the patient, and then cauterize it so that it does not protrude.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat the inside so that the wound may be healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Beware lest you presume to incise the tissue which is of dark color, of little sensitivity, of weak regard, for that is absolute cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will come to the memory of the cancer with subsequent pain.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter twelve.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the treatment of the protrusion of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Protrusion of the navel is made by many causes; or by fissures of the ciphac which is above the belly, and from it the tissue or intestine comes out according to the other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or an artery as it is commonly said, or by constricted ventosity in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is by fissure of the ciphac and by coming out of the tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is less painful, and then appears in diverse situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that with it which we have recounted, of much more vehement diversity, and when you press that with the fingers it is hidden, and then returns; and it is strongly with it thus, and it is magnified by many dejections of sweat and vehement trembling.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	More pain occurs with humidity, then it is visible and not hidden when you press on the hand, neither is it constricted, nor is it believed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with this symptom, the abscess appears on the declined black part.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	More if it is from bad flesh, then it is a severe, thick and hard abscess, and the liver is affected according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	More if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is visible.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the liver, or of a vein, or due to gas; then beware that you are prohibited from the cure of it, for in that there is fear and dread as has been taught to you in the chapter in which I have spoken about abscesses due to liver and vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then beware that you command the patient to hold his leg up, and let it be extended; and then apply a bandage around the entire navel, and command him to lie on his back with his legs up towards his chest, and encircle the space around the navel with a spatula to the place where you have applied the bandage; and then extend the size of the abscess to the parts below with a large needle; and then tie it in the circle with a strong thread or with a ligature and the mallet of the surgeon.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then return the bowel to the middle of the abscess that extends over the ligament and introduce the said finger into that intestine and examine the bowel; and if you have not found or guarded it through the ligament, then extract the bowel and impel it with the parted fingers of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the web, then take that one with an ointment; and cut away the excesses of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that wound, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong strings and introduce two needles in the circuit that you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which make penetrate; and then tie the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area where the extended flesh can close by itself; or cut away what is thin and let it heal, and then cure that wound with the ointment that comes from the ulcers so that it may be healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is made of no flesh or by humidity, then take that you conquer the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that wound with the ointment that suits and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter three.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is the way to the treatment with medicine, and that it is necessary for the treatment with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said cancer generated in the marrow and caution of the treatment of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said that the ancients that some visible cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus as from cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and its semblance of the members allocated to extract all that, and mainly when it is starting small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	More when it is old and serious, it does not matter that you apply yourself to it, because I have not been able to cure any of those, nor have I seen others, nor has anyone arrived at this.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you should precede and prepare the patient and purge them of black bile certain visible things, and then bloodlet that, if it is a stopped and full manifestation.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located for operation, and then prophylax the wound with ointments that are suitable for it; and then concave the entire area around the wound so that it is well prepared to prevent any cause of the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow, and do not remove that ligament, and press the areas, and evacuate the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible to use among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If there is a contrary condition of thick blood from an incision of a vein or an artery, then cauterize that place until the flow of blood stops, and return to cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter five.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, the species of dropsy from the water, and the signs of each species, about the cure for it with medical treatments.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of altthritis alone, and it is not applied near to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hyposarca, because that is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of dropsy, tympanites, with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already obtained debility, or it is another illness, another dropsy, thus as if it is in the toes or belly and similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is about that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you have seen the patient with an abundance of vertigo, and it is not another disease but only dropsy, and neither infant nor old, then the manner of the operation is that you elevate the disease between your hands, and administer to them a hot application on the stomach with your hand, introducing water at the affected part of the intestine, and apply a spiny plaster according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp parts long, with sharp extremities thus as plaster; but however it should be in the little briefness small bit by bit, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and that you lead it out.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the part of the intestines, for it is known that you should make a section of the navel with three fingers' width to the affected parts below, on the right side of the intestine.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of dropsy is from disease of the liver, then your section should be on the left of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is from the bladder, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not suitable that your section be on the rib, on which the disease wants to be, so that the excesses do not run to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate the entire code with the instrument, and introduce it into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the code and the siphac, and you will extract that; and if the quantity of an nail or environment.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the siphac so that the spatula reaches the empty place, and it is the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and introduce an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or gold alloy, in which at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the extremity of it is engraved according to the manner of a feather pen, thus as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the uppermost extremity of it there is a little arm, because when the instrument penetrates the water, then that water rises above the instrument, thus evacuating from the water in the middle a certain quantity, because if you evacuate from it more than it can hold in the hour, the patient will likely die from the resolution of their animal spirit, or approaches death with the quintessence which is approaching.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Empty evacuation of that seat according to the quantity of the virtue of it and according to what the disposition of the patient indicates of the virtue of the pulse of it and of the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and hold back the water which causes it to be retained by the bowel, which holds the pipe that is above the navel, of which it is recommended to you that you perforate in that manner that way.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then insert the instrument to the other side if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do so for several days on account of fear, and guard yourself from error while not breaking more of the water except a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	When you fear for the patient, and a large quantity of water is drained, then treat that member with burial in hot sand, and immersion in bath, and expose to the sun for a long time; and treat that member with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the middle and the liver after the extraction of water, as it has been recounted to you in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter twelve or Chapter 12
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose places of urine are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some newborns are born with a hole in the stomach of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or it is strictly closed or it is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, we must make an opening in it as soon as it is born with a subtle spatula according to this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then stop up the hole with a small lead nail and tie it, and keep it for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when it wants to urinate let it be uncovered and urinate; and then cover it again.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop up the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes over the place will not close this.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	It is better for that which has a strict hole to be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Better are those in which the hole is not in its place, it is said, the cause of which is that some are born with the hole of the penis at the end of the head of the virility so that they cannot urinate in the divided parts inside, until they lift the virility to their mother in the divided parts above; and it is not a generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on them is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with vigorous extraction, and insert the point of the instrument at the place of the perineum with a sharp pointed tool, like one would insert a feather, or so that you do not touch any other part, so that the middle of the vein appears similar to the head of the penis and that which is drawn falls in the middle place according to need.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, many things can go wrong; and be careful with them that you are cutting the blood vessels, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 6.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	About the removal of what is done on the prepuce at the head of the penis and of corrosion and blackness and adherence of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this removal is done on the penis and it is an excess of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it is fitting that you suspend with a subtle hook and cut that one until it is completely removed; and then apply a poultice of submirgit, an Egyptian ointment; and then, treat the wound with a diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the ulcer is malignant, with a bad color, then it is advisable that you apply cautery near the edge of it and the root of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Moreover if the ulcer is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is within the prepuce and the other part is outside, then it is advisable that you show the ulcer which is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer one, for when you cure both at the same time, it is not certain that it will not be injured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also accidents happen in the genitals and in the prepuce with blackness and corruption, therefore it is advisable that you remove all that which is already degenerated and that which wants to corrupt or is already corrupted; and apply a liniment on that area with honey, which is mixed with flour of wheat and of dried and crushed roots.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat the one with the other cure until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is an efflux of blood, then administer lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For juvenile cautery is of two dispositions at the same time, one is for an efflux of blood and the other is for the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely at that time, then it is necessary that you insert into the middle of the foreskin a lead tube so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence only occurs in one whose foreskin is its own, and for whom circumcision has not been performed; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all adhesion.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish those things precisely, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula some part of the head of the penis and of the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is subtle, is perforated by its subtlety gently.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a gentle touch, which has previously been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be treated with a stringent ointment until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 48.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleansing of infants and the treatment of that which occurs to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity issues: but rather it's up to our operation and will, and the results of that are especially in children, it is necessary that we assign the best operation and way so that they lose less health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Thus I say that the ancients did not call circumcision in any of their free writings, because they didn't use it in their laws, and it's not so because we have acquired through experimentation, which is the reason why most artisans and barbers have been found using circumcision and purification with a new knife and tongs; and they use ligatures with thread and incisions with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already forbidden all these methods and do not find better purification with forceps, or ligatures with thread, than the purification with the nail, because many times it happens that the skin tears from below, since the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and one layer is left above, and this is where the tear is, which leads to another incision and secure pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the purification that is done by the apothecary, and is digital, which the surgeons use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secure, because the thread enters into its channel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	More damage in the operation with the nail, for the iron tool corrupts and mars the entire operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the child's bowel is short by nature, and many times seen in such a manner that there is no need for modification, and I have seen it before.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the modification that is done with forces and ligaments of the thigh, goodness, experiment has shown to me, where the forces are of proportional incision, because the acuity that is above is just like the acuity that is below; and thus when you press your hand proportionally on both acuities, and make an incision according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the thigh with a figure containing the bowel of the entire partition, with which no error is made.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you not do anything but place the thigh on its own partition, only so much, and that you lift it up into the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then do this to cheer up in all that manner which is at your possibility, according to what receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then be with your hands prepared in a steady position, and do not make any movement; and hide the forces in your hand or below the thigh, so that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into the patient's vagina and blow into the womb, and pull out that which is inside until the head of the fetus is visible, and then cleanse that which has accumulated in it due to the retention of filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then tie the tied area with a double thread, and tie below that one a small second ligature, and you put your fingers on the said pus and hold the area of the ligature well, and insert between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then lift the womb upwards and extract the head of the fetus; and gently press out the blood little by little, for it is better; and sprinkle powder above and on the powder place a cloth in which has been sprinkled mucus of houndog or owl, mixed with oil of rose, recently beaten; and apply that on the wound until the next day; and treat that with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the ulcers for cleansing, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let some of them be uncut and the others cut, so that the branch of the nail is not visible, and let the length of the two edges be equal to the length of two joined finger joints.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The greatest mistake in cleansing is when the inner womb expels all of its contents, or part of it, due to inadequate incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore it is necessary that you extend your finger during your hour on the edge of the abscess, and that you cut it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed, and the matter that is inflamed under the infected wound has not been discharged, then let it be that the discharge of the apostemation is facilitated, and cut away the feculent part with ease, and incise according to what you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the wound, lest it becomes putrid.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore treat it with the remedy that the wound consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised on the flank beyond measure, and the divided parts are opened, this will not be noticed by him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And thus treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or congealed blood, or by a mass or tumor, and similar to those things that we have said regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and there is retention of it in the bladder because of a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be seated on two chairs.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the feet of that one on the back of two chairs and stretch out the belly of the affected part above the back of the two chairs, and the patient should tighten their grip as much as is possible to them.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the neck of the bladder is constricted, it expels the stone to the back parts, so that the urine is absorbed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have mentioned, the cause is violently made on the patient, then it is necessary that you administer extraction of it with an instrument that is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and the needle should be subtle, like a small cane or reed, as thin as a feather's quill, in similarity to a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle hole at the top.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the handling of the emission of urine with this is that you take the thread doubled and tie it at the extremity of the wool or cotton for good ligature; and introduce the extremities of the thread into the part of the syringe, and cut with scissors if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but introduce it into the cane with violence. And then insert the syringe with force and with album of urine.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Make the patient lie on their side, and wrap the bladder of theirs and the rod with olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the needle with ease until it reaches the root of the rod; and then bend the rod downwards towards the navel; and then press the needle inwards there; and then press it inwards until it reaches the bladder, and this sign that the patient is being affected by the cause they are suffering from, and it is not done according to this order, but rather as the illness demands, where it goes awry.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then stretch the vein on the wool little by little, so that the urine wets the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and do for the cure of urine, and use a needle, do not stop doing this and use a needle until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 49.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of injection into the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments which are suited for that purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is obstructed by sediment, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then do so with an instrument which is called a clamp, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But in the extremity of it, it is numb, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that one there are three holes: two from one side, and thus many times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is what is swallowed, and it is according to the quantity that oppresses it, until when some cause is drawn from the humidity, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with it being drawn, and when it expels long, according as it makes clamp or clamp-like, as that which is made in the naval battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore when you want to project humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of the clamp into the humidity, and draw with it the water that is absorbed by the lower parts, because the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clamp.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of the clamp into the rod according to what we have recommended in the circle; and then absorb the humidity with the water that you absorb, because that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle bladder in which the bladder is shaped, and this is the shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And let it be made of silver or of gold, of which the head is similar to a small feather, and place the tube gently inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder by hand, and pause to remove the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and evaporate that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the catheter into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the humidity and strictured descent, so that the patient feels that the humidity has already penetrated to the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of sponge and make a circle from it; and perforate that with all its roughness; and then insert a strong thread into those channels, so that they are well wrapped; and then attach the circle as it has been attached to the navel, because you pause in that water that you want to drain, along with humors and liquids.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that to the instrument and do it in the same way as you have done on the bladder, and express with your hand that the humidity penetrates to the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and its symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that the stone on which every operation is performed with the hand, is cut.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone formed in the bladder itself is the one that is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now explain it with clear exposition and briefness.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that the stone formed in the bladder mostly goes to the children; and of its signs it is that the urine which is expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears as sand; and the patient rubs their groin, and many times it seems painful, and then it is treated; and with this the hole is made in many of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the cure for the children of that age who have reached 14 years is easy; and it is a difficult treatment in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young it is moderate because it is between the two.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And concerning that one for whom the stone is larger and the treatment is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore when we come to the treatment of this, it is necessary at the beginning of this that we cleanse the patient with a purgative which removes all the wound which is in their intestine; because this wound many times prohibits the evacuation of the stone by obstructing it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then press the patient's feet with your hands and hold them firm above so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, or it will jump out of place at some other visible spots.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that circle prepared between your hands, and the patient's hands will be placed on their hips, so that the entire bladder is made to decline towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then ask for a vessel and prepare everything for a bowel movement.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Then if you feel the stone in the space, then you will be satisfied as soon as it is dried on the patient.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if the patient does not touch everything with their right hand, then it is necessary that you anoint their right hand with oil on the left side of the bed, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert that in their buttocks.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And ask for the stone until it comes out from the patient's right hand.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn that small stone little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your right hand, and push that stone downwards towards the bottom of the bladder to the place where you felt it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the servant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another servant to extend the knees downwards with their right hand, and with their left hand to hold back the buttocks which are below the knees, in the area where the operation is being performed.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula to explore the incident of which this is the shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide in that which is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, above the left thigh; and let the incision be on that part and the right hand be inside the anus, and let a transverse incision be made, so that the external incision be wide and deep according to the quantity that comes out of the part as much as is possible, and not larger, because the hand compresses the right hand which is in the anus the stone against the incision, and it is facilitated without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is a part of the stone to which there are angles and margins, because of which the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that stone there comes out something resembling a nut, and it is round, and its extraction is made easy.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then if it is the one which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus easily removed, then you must push on that, or grasp around that with your hand decently, the extremity of which should be like a file on which you grasp around the stone, and do not let go of it; or you insert another subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot walk on that, then increase the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, apply to the strong area a cauterized vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the stone is more than one, then to begin with, you will push the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert a knife in it; and then push a little tube into that; and similarly do if there are many stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance would be to insert that with a large section, because it brings to the patient one of two causes: either death or that it prevents the continuous distillation of urine, because the area is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer a purge to make it come out from the inside, or put a bandage on the fracture with the forces that extract it in presses.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with a mixture of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And put on that a dressing soaked in oil and wine, or in rosated oil and cold water, so that the post-wound scab may be softened.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then have the patient lie on their back, and do not undo the dressing for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when the aura is unbound, moisten the area with water and warm oil, and then treat it with a gentle ointment of diafinicon and a soothing balm of diabazilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If the plague is complicated by an apostema caut, adjust and corrosive, and it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the egression of blood in the urine), then insert a tube into the wound and extract the blood, because remaining there it provokes corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sharp vinegar, water and salt, and apply to it all species, with that which is convenient for its cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And take care during the entire treatment that you apply the medicines which have been paused on the area, with your hands between the thighs and adjust them.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and in the middle of the bladder, and it is stuck, and the flow of urine is prohibited, then treat it with that which has been recommended beforehand to prevent a section, because many times this treatment is accused of being too dry; and already having tried and experimented, take a iron perforator, the shape of which is:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extracted fat, needle, made in a pipe or flute.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thread, and tie it to that verge of the thigh, near the hip, so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the verge, piercing with facility through until the piercer comes to that hip.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the piercer with your hand on that small hip, little by little, and you will make the piercing of it until you cause the other part to penetrate; for the urine is thus absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is broken of the hip of the affected part of the thigh, because it is weakened, and it is perforated with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not suited to you for some reason that prohibits it, then tie a thread behind the hip, and another thread above the hip.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then bind above the hip on that thigh between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the ligature and cleanse the wounded area with a poultice, which is made on the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	It is not necessary to tie the thigh with a bandage, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and another bandage above, because when the bandage is loosened near the rectum, the colon returns to its place and the wound heals.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to tie the thigh above, so that you elevate the colon to the separated parts above, or so that it returns and fulfills its duty, and the wound heals as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of the rectum from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	The rectum in women is rarely affected.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if the rectum is affected in any of them, then the cure is difficult and it is forbidden due to too many manual interventions.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman has a strong or strained back.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is wise enough to describe to the doctor what she feels, or one of the women having been married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation on the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the incision near the rectum in women is far from the place of the rectum, because deep indications of incision are feared, and there is danger in it.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	More often if necessity provokes you to this, then it is fitting that you take a woman doctor of science, and few are more skilled.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek a doctor who is subtle and skilled, or present a midwife who is trained in the art of women, or a woman who has shared knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore make that one present, and command to them that they do all that you will order, from the beginning of the inquiry to the commencement; which thing is because it regards whether the woman is a virgin, then it is fitting that one put their finger in the bottom of theirs and check the area.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore if you find that, cut that with your finger, and then command to them that they inject above that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the area, after placing her left hand on the bladder, and hold it with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore if you find that, then it is fitting that you gently move that from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts towards the summit of its virtue where it comes from, to the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert the needle into the fatty tissue of the thigh near the knee joint, where the flesh of any part is thickest, and place a small stone in that area, and let the patient's word not be heeded when the stone is pressed.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And let the incision be small at the beginning; and then insert the blade on that incision, and if the stone is felt, then adjust the incision according to the quantity that you know the stone will be extracted from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are many: for some of them are small and large, and rough and sharp, and long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know how many types there are of it, for that which you signify about that which you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, apply on the spot a triturated mixture and hold it for an hour until the blood is stopped, and then return to your operation until the stone is extracted.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you have prepared for yourself the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is cut, then apply powder on the spot and staunch it with dust and strict bandage, and do not repeat this; for leave the stone and do not extract it, because very likely the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the sharpness of the blood is calmed by certain days, and the place is purified, then you return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia with a cough.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is not anything but an accumulation of humidity in the white bile duct which is below the diaphragm of the testicles containing the urine, and it is called bile duct.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some times it is in the proper peritoneum which nature prepares for the urine, until it is said that there is another urine; and it is the diaphragm of the testicle between the white bile duct which we have mentioned, and it is not this but a tumor.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the testicles, because in them is accumulated this matter, and sometimes it happens by a blow made on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it is either declinating to citrine or bloody, or red, or it is black and feculent, or it is white and blanch, and it is that which is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known are this aggregation of water: for if it is in the white bile that we have spoken of, then the apostema is slightly declining in length thus as a figure of a hoop, and appears the genital area, because humidity contains that from every part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in its own pancreatic area, then the apostema is declining with separation of the hoop and thus one estimates that it is another hoop.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the coding of the genitals and the white bile, then remove the sediment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then probe the color of the humidity in the apostema with a mixture of heated material whose form is preceded; and according to what comes out in the remains of the mixture, judge what is lacking in it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is good that we command the patient to be bled if it is possible for them, and let them eat the liver of a beast.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then apply a resin over the seat, two or three on some cause a little higher, and let them drink the juice of raisins.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the left side of them, and command the assistant to follow on their right side, who should extend their arm to both sides of the hip joint and to the division of the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and divide the hip joint in the middle, lengthwise, close to the perineum.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the section be made according to a straight rule, at a distance from the line that separates the skin of the hips, until it reaches the white spine, including the pubic area.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scratch that, and observe, and be careful that you do not cut into it; and your scratching should be with the tool which is suspended from the upper arm and subtly examine the scratching according to the quantity that is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the full bladder with a wide perforation, and extract all of the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the wound with forceps, and stretch the bladder to the upper parts; and do not touch the hip joint, and cut the bladder in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut it in its entirety or in pieces, and especially the subtle lower layer, because if you do not examine the incision of it meticulously, it is not done safely so that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	When the hollow of that defect of his crotch in the time of your operation, after you have completed the section of the perineum, return inside that, and then adjust the two lips of the crotch of the genitals with a suture, and then cure it in the same way as the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the hollow corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to elevate the vessels which support the suspended matter, and extract the hollow, and then cure it with the same treatment that we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	When the water is collected in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; thus, cut that part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is a work, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you cleanse the wound, and insert a linen cloth submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place another clean linen cloth which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over the two genitals and the navel of the belly; and cover with double cloths and powders, and tie them with a bandage which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two cloths and fill them with hot woolen material according to this resemblance; and make the extremities tight with cloth or wet wool, and add them to the structure in the waist of the breeches, and one of the extremities take from the buttocks between the two, and the second take at the partition of the perineum, and two extremities over two hips and two other extremities on two thighs, and all the structure be adjusted in the waist of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with a cautery in place of a cut with iron; and it is that you take a sharp cautery knife and that you make incisions in the skin of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until it is discovered the white ciphac containing water, and then you take the cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled in Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that ciphac, and it is ignited until all the humidity is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then stretch the ciphac with tongs, and scrape it with tongs, and scrape it with a sharp ignited cautery; and make incisions according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the hole that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And it is known that this operation is more beneficial and longer in stopping the flow of blood, and better than an operation with a section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you find an abscess or a painful swelling at the time of section or at the time of cauterization, or flow of blood, then it is advisable that you cure the condition that causes pain to him, with the treatment that is suitable for him according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is faint-hearted and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then administer a perforation as I have recommended; and it is when you are certain of this, based on what we have said about the symptoms, that this hernia is painful.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then it is advisable that you place the patient on some elevated chair, and puncture the abscess in the lowest part of him with a spatula, and make the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide enough that all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then press on the place with a bandage and bind it, so that the rest of the water flows out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if a condition prevents the flow of water at that time, you perforate it: and this is not done except for when the white pancreatic tissue in the orifice of the wound causes a condition and prohibits the outflow of water, then it is advisable that you insert into the wound a needle or instrument with which the water of the drops is extracted, the form of which is described; or adjust on the opening of the wound a small tube.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and it is given for six months or a year to those; and when it is administered, then it should be pierced according to the manual technique, so that the patient will pass their urine.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of the section on fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You know that in the section on this hernia, there is a feared loss of function in the major dispositions; because to me it seems that the dismissal of it and being saved by that which is better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am reminding about the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the abscess is born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is made by many causes: either by sharp acute superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And also there is a putrid abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not adhere to it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some swellings are made by inflammation of the arteries, and by inflation of those which have already been perceived as remembered, or by inflation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Mainly that which is due to inflammation of the arteries is diagnosed by the dispersion of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers; and do not touch that which is putrid.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	Mainly that which is made by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed from it for any reason except compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species a section is made and on the other parts; and it is that you cut the tendon of the genitals, and then stretch the skin to the divided parts, and extract that from the white cartilage, and release the suspensor of the vessels, and tie them, and cut the suspensor so that you release that entire part of the parts of the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the skin is already consolidated in those fleshy parts, then it is advisable that you extract the skin and cut it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between any part of the cartilage, or between that which is between the vessels, then it is advisable that you release the entire adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Mainly if there is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it is advisable that you cut all that is of it, and extract the skin as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and vinegar; and then take care to treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernia that is of the groin.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A hernia is an abscess enclosed by some wrapping resembling a tumor with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness is to be feared because of that which is preceded by inflammation.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I will say what operation to perform on it, as the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should make the patient sit on an elevated chair; and then press the suspender of the testicles to the divided thighs; and then tie the string of the genitals with threads or laces to the buttocks which are next to the penis; and hold those other ministers that you have, and stretch those with a vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then make an incision in the spatula with a sharp knife by cross-section on the right of the buttocks until the buttocks are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scratch from the entire area thus as you have said in extraction of varices which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then put in those a needle in which there is double thread, and tie that on the first of the places where the veins occur, and tie another one at the back of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut those in the middle place for section of bad and fetid humidity, and extract that which is aggregated from the foul and corrupted moistures.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with care of the other wounds in which you want to be regenerated so that the veins fall, which not being one of the two genitals, is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the veins occur to all the lower parts, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles for this reason be tied to the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the cutting of the veins, and that they be cauterized, or that they be tied so that they are not joined with those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is by section that creates an end to the cyphac extending over the belly from the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that saying the intestines of that rupture go to some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is of the spleen or of excess of it, and these two species are caused by many reasons: either by percussion, or by salt, or by shouting, or by elevation of some serious cause, or by resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	In the case of this, when it is due to extension of the spleen, it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms between the diaphragm and the stomach so that the spleen compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the symptom of it is when it is due to inflammation of the spleen, because at the beginning it makes a vehement pain happen suddenly; and it is a diverse abscess appearing under the ribcage, appearing externally, and this is due to obstruction of the intestine, and the body of it is divided into parts above the spleen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it happens that the net of the intestine is pushed out through a hole in the abdomen, and this is called an intestinal hernia, or sliding.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made in the stomach area, and sometimes it runs into the intestine and gets stuck, and this is a great danger to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad and severe pain especially when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of the species of this disease, iron is feared, because it is believed that the evacuation should be avoided.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the internal parts of its cavity, if they obey its return, and place themselves bent over their own neck between their thighs, and lift their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stitch the cord which is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and cut the cord of the testicles all along the length; and put in two lips of the section oil according to what was indicated to heal the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section, according to the quantity that is possible for you, from which the hole was made outside.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excavate that which surrounds the cords of the testicles, until the white hard knot of each part is uncovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white knot, which is where the cord of the hole is, and between the knot, and resolve the adherence that is in the part behind the hole.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then take the left hand to the scrotum of the testicles to the sides of the behind, and with the right hand extend the white cloth under the left hand, and lift the humidity to the cloth at the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humidity in this way and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with a complicated solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And be certain with the fingers that there is no cause for the intestine being enveloped in the white cloth during the procedure.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause in them, then press that to the belly of the patient.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with which is made a thick thread of six threads, and insert it beneath the behind of the cloth, which is under the scrotum of the testicles, which is the section; and then sew the extremities which come out of the thread so that they are four threads, and then compose some of them over some figure in the shape of a cross; and tie this to the cloth which we have said is behind the scrotum with a strong bond of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them with a vigorous bond so that some of the vessels which are irritated do not pour out and cannot transmit any cause for which from here does not follow an aposteme or a severe inflammation.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And stop the other vein that ties according to the first tie, three fingers from the navel; and take these two ties and place them under the navel of the hip, where the cod is placed on the testicles in the quantity of their size, and cut all the remaining part roundly, and remove it from the hole.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then cut in the area where the cord of the testicles is, for a section through which blood and urine flow, as we have recommended in what we have said previously.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And administer the flaxseed oil as an enema, and apply it to the wound; and administer the tie that we have recommended (and some veins of the white hip are cauterized, which we have said regarding the incision of the vein with a flow of blood, because many veins are cut) and remove the tie so that the blood flows.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the falling of the blood is delayed, then let hot water be applied as a poultice, and put it on that place where the blood flows, as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And cure the wound with the other cures of wounds so that it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Of bloated hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been cauterized under the treatment of iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with the vein; which is that you lift the vessels and place the section above the ease of the patient; and you dry in the middle location around the apostema with that which helps, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the distortion that is made in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some swellings show a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and cause pain in the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not say to the knees any cause of the intestines to the knees; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, there is adjusted a fissure in the hip until the intestine descends into the hip; and it happens that through the extension of the hip, which is in the ankles as we have said, causing the hip to be stretched, and placed is made soft and the area becomes inflamed and hurts.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The cure of it is with a cautery thus that it is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some times it is cured with iron following this method: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their two hands, and then dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses with a scalpel for the width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white hip that is under the kidney until it becomes uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the bladder and place it on the prominent area of the hip, and press it against the pressure of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two prominent areas on the extremity of the bladder of the hip, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the bladder, and do not insert it into the hip at all, nor does it extend to the groin, nor any other cause thus that you will know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that one with the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the threads, clean that one and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the hip is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And a cautery is better in this place, because it is more beneficial for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the skin of the testicles is touched in some men it becomes soft due to excess moisture, because the flesh that is between it becomes softened, and its preservation is damaged.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary for the one who is preparing the cure of it to make the patient lie on their back, and to lift the entire skin which has been softened above the natural skin; and then to adjust the two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut in the beginning the excess of the softened skin with three stitches or four and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then cure by curing the other wounds until it is healed and the fevers subside.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but for a reason it is legitimate for me to remind you of it in this book; and the reminder of it is not necessary except for two manners, of which one is that in the science of medicine when one is skilled in it, knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other manner is that we often have need of castration of other animals for our young, such as of many kids, and of oxen, and of pigs, and of similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that cauterization is done in two ways: either by friction or by incision to section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	More in that which is done by friction, the way of the operation is that we make the beast soak in hot water until the genitals of it become softened and loosened and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear, removing the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	More in cauterization done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspender, and make an incision above each testicle with one cut so that two testicles are separated.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those parts that you want to remove from each.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on those of the scrotum any cause, but the thin scrotum which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of cauterization is better than that which is done by friction, because friction strongly leaves some cause of the testicles for which the beast desires to copulate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter twenty.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is seen in two manners: one is when it appears that there is a space in the scrotum of testicles, in which case there is a female figure between two testicles, for whom there are hairs.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some times urine comes out of that hole which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women it's a species: and it is that the womb of the woman on the perineum is similar to two testicles of a man, a little all joined together at the division of the vagina, like the penis of a man with two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two in men and of one species in women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should remove those adjusted flesh growths so that the swelling of that thing subsides, and then you will cure them with the treatment of other plagues.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men, from which urine comes out, which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter twenty-one.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On protruding lips and flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The ligature is strongly adjusted over natural causes within which it is tightened and made to hold the bandage; and some women are magnified in some ways so much that they spread like men and appear in the streets.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then remove the excess of ligature from your hand or with a knife and scissors.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not cut too much, especially on the edge of the reason, so that no flow of blood is hindered.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then heal that wound with the cure of the wounds within which it will be healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Bad flesh is flesh that is born in the horror of the mother within which it fills, and strongly it is ejected to the partitions of blood according to the likeness of a hernia (and for this reason some first call it "fallen illness"); therefore remove that we cut thus as we cut ligatures, and heal it within which it will be healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or the hole is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to illness which has preceded it, and that is made by flesh not adjusted or by a subtle or thick spleen.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is made in the prison of the womb, or in the costs of it, or in the upper part of the pus, or in the lower part of the pus, and forbidden from coition and from pregnancy and from childbirth, and strengthen the forbidden menses.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the recognition of that is made by examination of the matrix, if the obstruction is apparent, it is proclaimed; but if it is not apparent, then search for that with the fingers or at the area.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a subtle sphincter, and it is proclaimed to the dual lips, then touch and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you apply to the dual lip folds, and immediately after that, touch the fingers indicating both hands under the affected areas.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, the thighs extended, and immediately after that, extend the dual lips outward so that the subtle sphincter is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take a flannel and anoint it with oil and apply that to the area, and hold it there all day so that the area does not become consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the sphincter is thick and dense, then it is necessary that you cut that with a broad spatula or with a mortar's spoon.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	More often if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that limb with a bandage, and cut into that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And you put on them the medicines that make stop the flow of blood with emollients, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and juniper, mixed with the white of an egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a lead pipe widely so that the wound is not consolidated lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold that for several days and administer massage with dry licorice.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it should be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some times they occur in the native birthplace of other flesh, and then it is necessary to cut following this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to cancerous aposteme, for the cancerous aposteme which is in the matrix let there not be done counter-irritation with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 123.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that occurs in the cleft of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the appreciation of the orifices of many veins inside which there runs much continuous blood; and as they are antiquated hemorrhoids, thus they are made.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and to say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that the intestines and liver when are in the grip of the matrix and do not appear to feeling, then in those cases treatment should not be made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	More of those which are in the orifice of the matrix, above which feeling is detected, are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is good that you put the woman in a cold wrap and then extend the thigh to the orifices, or with a rough cloth, and incise those at the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those wounds with the flow of blood from one of the incised powders that cause mordication, thus as cassia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then immerse the feet in a water for an hour, and then soak that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that plaster with decoction of sumach and with powders of millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of orris root and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster to apply on the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the blood is separated, it is good; and if not, make an adherence with two bandages, and to the breasts scars will be made.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of colicander or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarravier with five pennies, and make an adherence to the area; and then heal the area with a plaster until it is healthy.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	More than that, I ask you to be careful with what has been written, because you know how to discern what is pertinent to that which has been said in the aforementioned treatment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal it until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the accidental perforation of the intestine in the matrix.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various species of apostems that occur in the matrix, such as cancer and apostemic plague, and ulcers, and indurated and eroded tumors, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragadias, and thyl, and other apostems.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken of these illnesses and the species of those, and the signs of those, and the cures for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is known that I have said in this treatise of apostems that the cautery which is made on the matrix when there are apostems that collect pus, and if you want to know in what manner the operation with iron is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	When considering if the pain of the abscess in the beginning is sharp with percussion and fever, and sometimes that swelling and if it falls on the sentiment, then do not think about perforation, and cure it with what helps with the maturation until the intensity of the accidents decreases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then make the woman lie on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back with her feet adjusted to the separation of the belly, and her thighs spread, and place her arms under her shoulders, and tie each one with a ligature to what is conveniently available.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife takes the right hand and administers the instrument with which the opening of the womb of the mother is made, the shape of which will be described in those cases that will be done afterwards.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And then when you want to administer this instrument, make it touch the womb of the mother of the woman, and what of the instrument enters into the womb should not be more than the womb of the mother and lead to the illness.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the womb of the mother, then make sure to place pads on the texture of the womb of the mother so that the entrance of any instrument into the womb of the mother is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you stop the flow that runs in the instrument of the side, from above, and that the assistant holds the instrument and rotates the flow until the opening of the matrix is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the tumor appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is soft and tender, then it is necessary that you cut that which is above the head of the abscess with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary that you apply to the wound a gauze soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and press the calculus into the section in the navel of the matrix.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And put on the matrix and on the perineum a clean cloth soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it will be cured in two days, provided that one is applied to what is convenient until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some times the matrix and the wound are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which root of iris or aristolochia is boiled, and then the plaster is reapplied.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deeply entrenched in the matrix, then it is necessary that you desist from the treatment of it with iron, instead treat it with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To instruct midwives in what manner the unnatural embryos are to be treated medically when they are seen according to a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes in the beginning the figure of the natural birth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express at the times of labor and desire to smell the air, and about this she is relieved by that which is on her from the part, and examines the essence of the embryo, then know that this part is according to the natural figure, and its essence is above or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see these signs, then it is necessary that the belly of the woman be compressed so that the embryo moves down slightly, because when they are above on the navel, they move to the vulva, and it is cleaned of those superfluous things for a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	More often it is that this part is unnatural and not praise-worthy, because when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the woman is situated in front of her head and her feet, or one hand of hers, or at her foot, or it is situated with her head and her hand, or at her belly, and for a long time it is turned on its navel, and appears as one of the unnatural figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	The doctor needs a necessary cause to be wise and subtle in all those cases, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And thus showing the entire figure of those things, and what engine or device is in those things so that it is signified by them and is established upon them.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is situated above the womb by natural increase, and it is vehement on the woman and is made in the difficult part, and times the virtue of the already debilitated womb, then make that which women have, and evaporate the congealed humor with a warm decoction and with humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife inserts her hand between the woman's thighs, a small spatula, and makes an incision in that second [membrane], or dries it with her fingernail, removing from it what is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with a plaster of pitch and a decoction of figs with cypress.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, and anoint her, to be compressed and make her vomit with a concoction; and tie her mouth and her nose for one hour, so that the fetus will be forced out as soon as possible.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two hands of the feet are swollen at the beginning, then it is advisable that you reduce them with facility little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	More if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and hold the chair firmly to the ground; and let the woman be held so she does not fall during the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not skillfully turned and the foot dies, then incise those and extract the morbid matter from the foot or bind the body to the hand of the one with a cloth and extract that one equally, because that will be swollen.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of swelling of the embryo on the two feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot is swollen on the two feet, then it is advisable that you impel them in their own, and return the foot small, and that you bend it, and that you take one of them and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they are swollen between the thighs, then you command it to be extracted, and make that one extrude with condition, because it will be swollen if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not swollen with what we have recommended, then you return the foot little by little until it takes its natural shape, because then it will be swollen with less swelling.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to use all that we have recommended, then take a mixture of high alum and dissolved gum, and strike it thoroughly in the mortar with good percussion, and apply this paste to the wound of the woman, at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And make that mixture into a cold water infusion, until it achieves the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the separated parts of them are thus softened, then make for them a subfumigation of myrtle and apply it to them.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have applied the subfumigation for an hour, then make a poultice on a seat, and apply it to induce vomiting and clear the mouth of them, and lift their legs, and press the separated part at the lower abdomen with gentle compression, so that the fetid humor may be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Let the foul matter come out over the seat and hands of them.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the foul matter comes out in this manner, then gently and slowly insert their hands little by little; and place the woman's face downwards on the seat, and her feet hanging down, and those should be resting on a ladder, and join their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gently press on her belly little by little, and extract what is left from the ears of them into the lower parts until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot is not forgotten, then take the feet of the patient and move them vehemently, and press what is above the hypochondria little by little until the foot reaches the separated parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	Then insert your hands and rock the foot little by little, and command the woman to press inside until the foot is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	A poultice is placed on the foot lengthwise during the time one of their hands is being held.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Let it be thought in reduction of the hand of the patient, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and make her go.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if going is not possible, then make the patient lie on their back, and strike the thighs of the patient with violent concussion, and then administer ointments which are made from mucus.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if swelling has come, then make the patient sit on a chair, and then attend to the reduction of the hand, and rock the foot according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press inside until it is forgotten.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	A poultice on the foot with expanded hands and the surface of the patient is at the two of their mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the hand of the child and gently turn that small one little by little, and thus facilitate that.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is swollen, then place on the joint of the aforementioned area that we have recommended of oil and of poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command her to massage gently little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and command her to lean on the right side, and command her to be compressed; and make her vomit with a condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus exits over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you are about to horrifically cut through the mother following this method, consider, and then you insert your nail between the second one so that it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended by the face and neck, then you insert that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then insert the child in the divided parts inside so that it rests according to what is necessary, and send the woman to compress certain times, and it will be forgotten with a gentle movement, if God or will.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or of many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	It seems that twin births are rarely seen in nature, and some say three or four, but this is strange and uncommon; more so because the cause comes from nature, and it's not a living thing.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And consider those, already being multiple, a second one, and they are separated by the navel, distinguishing those within the ligament in the navel of each of those. Some births are unnatural as if it is a fact from natural movement, and some are also considered unnatural as we have counted previously.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of their births are difficult to deliver, and they come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you will cure them in the same way that we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And the midwife should be subtle and do what facilitates and is done with subtlety, and not delay, and be ingenious according to the entire figure as it has been prepared by art leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed with one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more, and it has been verified by me that a woman aborted nine, and another ten, all of which were fully formed, the cause of which was made by measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And it is known in the science of midwifery that a strong woman aids in that labor with a similar device, and thus one operates on it as if it were a womb.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus with the method we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not forced out, and you are not skilled in using the operation with your hands, then consider if the woman is of good virtue and not at risk of accidents for which loss on her part is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is that the woman should be placed on her back on a seat or bed, and her head should be inclined downwards and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold the two parts of her, or tie her to the seat, so that her body does not move away from the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then anoint the mother's mouth with olive oil and mucus of altaea and of fenugreek and of sesame seed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucus, and then inserts her hand with ease into the mother, and then seeks with her hand the place where the fetus is stuck.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And find a convenient place for this: then consider if the foot is prepared to be placed on the head, and then put the ankles in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or leave the beard, or in the furrow of it, or in the proper places of the ribs, or leave the hypochondriums.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	More if the placement is on the feet of it, then in the penis, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And take the ankle with the right hand, and hold the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with ease and put the ankle in some of those places we have mentioned, until you reach the underlying cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then take and place on the opposite side of it another ankle, or the thigh if necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its natural straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And massage the entire affected area, so that its discomfort is alleviated just as it is done in order to eradicate it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And take in that which is between them that the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then take that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and inserts them gently and stirs with those fingers the retained area.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the foot is dislocated, then the ankles are loosened and placed in the area where it should be; and do so until the entire foot is dislocated.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is displaced outward from the other, and it's not possible to reduce it by constraining it, then take a cloth that has been wrapped around it; and carefully extract it until it's entirely dislocated, and reset it either in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the foot is large, or is constricted in the swelling, or is in the head of the water being adjusted, then take a spatula and insert it between the tendons and split the head and extract the water, or that it be scraped with an instrument which is called “alundat”, the shape of which will be described along with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter which is relevant to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the foot has a large head by nature: then take and reset it with a chisel, or that it be scraped with an alundat as we have said; and carefully extract the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is elevated and constricted by the pillow, then it should be cut out so that the humidity which is in the chest is evacuated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	More or less, if it's not complicated, nor an obstruction to elevation, then you will incline the head as much as is possible to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the abdomen is swollen with an abscess or it is dropsical, then it is necessary that you perforate that area so that the humidity which is in it can flow out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	More or less, if the fetor is above the two feet, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the matrix is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	More or less, if it is constricted by the abdomen and chest, then it is necessary that you extract that which you have wrapped with a cloth over your hand, and that you cut the abdomen and chest so that what is in them can flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	More or less, if the other members are stopped and the head is turned, then the left hand enters; more or less, if the mouth of the matrix is opened, then the hand enters the womb, and near that, the head is turned, and it attracts that with the fingers into the mouth of the matrix, and places one or two fingers inside, and pulls it towards those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an apostemal cautery which adheres to it, then beware that it does not cause turmoil within it; however, beware then to administer an infusion of humid and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the pain is on the side of the liver, then if possible, it should be pricked: and there should be administered what we have said for the painful liver.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then let it be cut into pieces, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And beware that you do not leave any cause of pain within the second intestine.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of apostems, those that adhere to the womb.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is an adherence of bloody flux, then dip in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in whose womb the fetus was dead, and then upon that place another conceived fetus, and then the dead fetus is another matter.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It adheres to the navel for a long time an apostem; and it is inflated between the womb and the intestines, and begins to throw out arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you were called to treat him, and you treated him for a long time, but the wound is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you applied to him from some causes a plaster of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and then passed the urine, and extracted another bone; and you were very marvelled, since there is no bone in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you probed the wound, and extracted from it many bones, the woman existing in her seventh month of pregnancy, and already had been in such a manner for a long time, and delivered from it a small arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you do not find it strange, but rather that in this there is knowledge and help for that which the doctor's skillful hand administers for the cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a vertex with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a holder in which the limbs are held, to whose holding belong two vertices at the two extremities of two fetuses.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	It is recommended that this vertex be made more subtle by the craftsman, and that it be made of ivory or of boxwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each thigh is two fingers and the margin of each thigh is one finger, and the length of each thigh is one and a half palms; and in the middle location of two thighs there are two adjustments of that same thigh, which are already firm, of which the length is a little more than half a palm, and the width of each thigh is two fingers or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions should be introduced into the mouth of the matrix so that it opens with those when you apply the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Make another similar to that one, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made from the fibers of elder or boxwood, according to the resemblance of strengths.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	More often on the extremity of it put two additions thus times, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the matrix, then make the woman sit on a chair with her feet hanging, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then take your hand with the instrument thus as you make a hole according to the quantity that you want of the width of the mouth of the matrix, until the thread makes what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness that the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of swelling on which the foot is swollen:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of friendship on which the big head is constricted
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with forceps to which the teeth are in the extremity, like times, and some visits are made long like forceps according to this form, like times, to which the teeth are like teeth of reassurance on which it has fallen and is constricted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of little or weak friendship:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a wound having a spine or splinter:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a wound having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps on which the teeth of the shoe are, on which the head of the foot is constricted:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities on which the head is separated or cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad or wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and the more the species of that one are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, the easier it is to its operation and the more useful it is for men because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments, for they should be prepared by you, because the need for them is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second [or possibly "the afterbirth" or "placenta"], however considering
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained from the birth, then it is necessary that you command the ill woman to retain her seat, and make her vomit with a concoction, and hold your hand over her mouth and over her nostrils, and if by this way she is not discharged, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a woolen cloth and perforate in the blanket a hole and put in that opened mouth of the mother, thus with warmth and rough and nettle and chamomile and dried Arabic and Cassia wood and holy tree.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	Soak all these herbs or some of them in water in the cloth, and put that on the womb.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then put a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make her vomit in the way we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure is not effective, then you command the midwife to insert her left hand into oil of juniper or in a mixture of nutmeg, and then introduce it into the womb and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the womb of the mother, then introduce the hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the afterbirth, extract it slowly so that the mother does not feel vehement pain.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Let both sides of the costal areas be permeated with gentle ease on the right and left.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust in the amount of traction, so that it will obey and withdraw from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with purging and medication of the bile with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not make an iteration of abstraction on that, but rather it is necessary that what comes out of it from the mouth of the matrix to the thigh of the woman, and then apply a plaster and tetra-pharmakon; because that will make her purify for several days and it will be dissolved and forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is purified, the evil humor is elevated from her to the head and to the stomach, and that oppresses the patient; and then it is necessary that sub-phumigations and conveniences be administered to her.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already used a sub-phumigation of dried nasal snuff and of dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Shape of an instrument with which the woman is fumigated to retain the menses and the secondine ( likely referring to a device used to treat female disorders, such as retention of menstrual flow or afterbirth).
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It must be done with sight or by feeling.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the thin extremity be placed in the bowl and the wider extremity over the focus, and the sub-fumigation be placed on the arms of the focus.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that one until the sub-fumigation is consumed and another one is put in its place.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of the treatment of the navel of the unperforated child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born and their navels are not perforated, which have a thin and closed cicatrix.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then tell the midwife to pierce that cicatrix with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatulum, and be careful not to touch the liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And immediately apply on that place a flannel soaked in wine and oil; and treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is closed, then put a cannula in the navel for many days, and remove it when the child is able to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is closure of the navel due to consolidation of a wound or an abscess; then tell that this consolidation should be incised, and immediately treated with what we have said about the treatment and the poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the treatment of fistulas that appear in the eyes.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that appear in the low part of the eyes are a sign of thickening and nodules, which appear near the anus or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many boils.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodulation is ancient and corrupted by damp whitish or subtle purulence, and some veins are seen coming from these fistulas, some penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating are known by the fact that a discharge is issued from them through excretion and flatulence; and some times it happens that the patient has diarrhea, and often the worm is expelled from them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are seen in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the marrow of the penis; and some of these penetrating go into the joint of the thigh and into the knot of the hip.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which a penetrating fistula is recognized as entering into the anus and not entering, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you insert a thin probe of iron or wire into the fistula when there is no obstruction.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is an obstruction in it, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into which you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything in the entire abdomen nor any protrusion of the bowel or any cause of evacuation or worms or gas, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then touch the area to be treated.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the sign of it is excessive urine from that and prohibition to him from going to the place where medicine will be applied to consolidate it.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	More so if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and increases pain in the circle, then the signal of it is that the tenderness is felt inside here, if there is not brittleness inside the bone, and increase of pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that of it produces pus and discharge; and that it does not respond to medication, nor is consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all, and the treatment of those is labor and vanity of the foolish doctors, on which they are firm.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in the one that is not penetrating and not chronic, healing with iron is hoped for, according to what you have recounted, and that which has already been tried and proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on the back of the bed and lifts their legs inside, the thighs are inclined towards their belly, and then insert a probe of lead, or of iron if it's an anal fistula, until you feel the place where the probe penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that sensation causes the patient to turn around the neck, then it is necessary that you insert your finger inside the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated and uncovered the passage, or if you feel between the finger and the sphincter or flesh, then you are certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because it is not in that place where healing will occur, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	More importantly, I have said to some that certain illnesses are healthy in certain men badly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medication for which it is hoped that youth is regained in him, it is that you apply subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then repeat this two or three times until you feel that all those adjusted tissues, which resemble a nest of feathers, are adjusted.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with warm poultices enveloped in cloth so that all those adhering tissues are softened, and treat that with medicine that engenders and consolidates the flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it is not healthy within a certain time for another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate through the tissue where it is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is only a few inches of flesh or intestine, and it touches the fistula on what is the surface of the bowel, then cut the bowel from the start of the fistula, and you will cut with the probe, and let it be in the fistula so that the cutting reaches the place where the end of the probe appears, and through the probe it is liberated and emptied.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated tissues which are gathered like a tube of straw and not broken by any of these causes.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	More often if there is a flow of blood that comes between you and your operation when you dissect those tissues, then the instrument that should be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for cautery with fire adjusts good habits: it is the adjustment of those tissues, and the removal of bad blood, the excision of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat the wound with warm compresses or trusses applied to the affected area, and also treat the plague with a plaster made from hard fat that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these are the medicines in which there is purging and evacuation; when the treatment is restored, it is already healed and you do not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	More often if the fistula has passed into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert the pointed instrument into the anus and investigate with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you feel the tension and between you and it is a vein of blood or flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather a way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either that you cauterize the area as we have said; or that you evacuate it by entering and achieving its cavity, so that you can introduce the instruments and the cure provided; and do not proceed with too much evacuation so that you do not irritate the lacert containing the intestine, and that you act on the patient's will and consent; and then treat it with what we have said before, which will strongly heal it; or that you extend the vein and remove the pus that you evacuate from the area near the anus, as we have said, either with a tent or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse the fistulized flesh which is in the evacuated area where you can make an incision; and then strive to make the restoration of the entire wound with evacuation, and if the purulent pus does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And some fistulas are finished in this manner: it is when you insert the thread into the fistula, and it is in the flesh of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the codena and in the margin of the buttocks, then take the thread of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the orifices according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that vein wrapped with 5 veins or around those; and then insert the thread into the vein in the fistula until you achieve the cavity of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	More if it is penetrating in the margin of the buttocks deeply, then you extract the vein from that hole like you insert your finger in the buttocks; and extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or for two, and when you see the vein coming out of the flesh, tighten until those flesh are coming out which are between the two extremities of the vein and that fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	More if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you have prepared, but that it be more in the groin, because it is not for you to do this so that the urine does not come out; and then do it in such a way that it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spine is where the fistula is split: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not cut unnecessarily, thus as needed.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of the stitching of swollen veins in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Swollen veins are judged by two methods, whether they are between the hemorrhoids and the buttocks or if they are with a fat of excessive flesh.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those that are small and large, and where the blood flows from them in abundance, and it is one, and very abundant, and outside the buttocks, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Worse are the ones that are outside the buttocks according to the amount of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is next to the anus is that we command the patient to sit and to strain themselves so that the anus opens and the swollen veins appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you touch and lift with your fingers or that you hold them with your nail, and then cut those according to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the ulcers are not held in those places due to their humidity and softening, then take those with a coarse cloth or with a cotton swab or with a flannel of wool, and extract those with the fingers, and immediately sprinkle those and powder over them certain powders suitable for the wound, for application instead of cauterization; or cauterize those as previously described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal those with another cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the evacuation, then anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is a mild biting, and let it be washed with that water which is in the basin and which will facilitate evacuation gently when the patient presses.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are protruding from the anus, then their cause is alleviated, and it is that you take those with your nail, or that you take those with a needle, and prick them, and immediately heal them with the water that we have mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the one who has undergone incision, it is necessary to administer suture in this manner: take thread and insert it into the needle, and then extract the hemorrhoids from the divided parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extracted ends of the thread around the divided part below the needle, and lengthwise; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong stitching, and immediately knot the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Make a cut in that area, and take out one of them, and do not cauterize, so that the excess blood from that wound does not flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then put a poultice on the buttocks made with rose oil or wax; and apply that to the anus, and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then remove that which falls into a box; and when it is cut, treat those wounds with an ointment or another cure so that they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Mouth wounds caused by excessive evacuation of feces or by constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and not valid in that medicine, then it is advisable to apply those to the point of spit or with your nail so that they are made humid and the pus is drawn out from them, which prohibits their consolidation; and then treat those so that they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then apply those with a violent purging so that the first thing is blood and they are scraped; and then treat those so that they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, it is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	It is known that hemorrhoids, it is clear, and not if there isn't a notable swelling according to the color of the body resembling a head of lavender, and it is made in all the body and mainly in the lower parts near the feet and the thighs, and it comes from those painful veins.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary that what has grown in the area of the groin be held with tongs or with an onion, and be eradicated from its root; and then treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second one that is described in the following chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Warts are a small, rough, round, ulcerated protrusion on the surface of the body, and similar growths appear on the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to stretch and cut that, or to tighten it with a string or a hair that fits into the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with a hot iron or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the warts are eradicated, both inward and outward, with the instrument that I have described.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Warts are a small, fatty, ulcerated or fistulous growth on the surface of the body, especially on the thumb, and when you touch it, it seems to be centered in the likeness of a boil, and it is found around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a needle of cotton thread or of wool thread, and make it strong, and place it over the wart until it is held by the circle of the thread of the parts of it; and then rotate your hand with the needle so that you cut what is in the area of the wart, and press it into the thumb of the flesh, and eradicate the wart from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make that with a cane of iron or of wood according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the division of the cane be with subtlety, deaf (that is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that above the aforementioned thing the absorption of it should be alleviated and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the woman according to what is stated above in the cauterization of the thigh in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the form of the instruments that are administered to give a purging.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some enemas are made of silver or of gold or of iron forged or hammered; and some enemas are made from those small and large instruments according to those for which they are administered, because that which is administered in the treatment of little children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are fragile or painful, their enemas should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and few enemas:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The end of the cane from which it hangs, in which the bag is tied, should be wide in this manner; and let the distinction be where the bag is tied, like so many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the part that is inserted into the buttocks, which enters, should be deaf (that is not opened), almost to the end, with subtlety; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the thighs and a little thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the pouch be where the medicines of the bladder of the beast or of sheep's skin are placed, and its reason being one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be perforated by many holes thus as it is rolled up; and if the space which is between the holes is of the thickness of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those holes a strong and crude filament which should be of ten filaments, or surround those; and adjust to it the pouch; and when the pouch is placed on him, let it be tightened around the head of the roll between two distinguishing strong bands, and then tighten the roll to each hole: The quality of tightening the roll to each hole is that you fill the pouch with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it not be too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be supported on his back, and lift his legs up to him and place under them a cushion on which are already the men or a lanolin; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucus of fenugrec or of similar things; and then insert that into the anus with ease, and then the minister takes the pouch and expresses it with two fingers and presses with vehemence until all that is in the roll is evacuated into the intestine; and then extract the roll and the patient lifts his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if medicine forces that symptom, hold it as much as possible; and if sleep comes to that person for an entire night, it is more beneficial in treatment.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More so if you diagnose that person with ailments of abdominal discharge and the symptom of theirs the thigh, then you will apply the cautery until they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are painful hemorrhoids or abscesses, then let the diagnosis be subtle and precise, of the diagnoses with which the children are diagnosed.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of wounds what is suitable for the free man, and I will speak thus the treatment of those with illness and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place where the wounds occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many wounds are made are like gathering of gravel, or cutting with a sword, or with a knife, or beating with a lance, or with a fist, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many other causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More wounds that are in the places of the body are like a wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And thus we recommend the cure of certain wounds for which we pause this reasoning and rule over other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And we will begin with the simple head wounds, for the discussion of the composite ones will come after the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to a blow from a stone or something similar, and the skin has been torn only slightly and it's a large wound and you fear the onset of an abscessing caut, then seize the moment and perform a cephalic bloodletting as soon as possible, and don't delay; and extract from that vein according to the quantity of the virtue of it, if there's no prohibitive cause for bloodletting, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is scarce.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the bloodletting be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and protect the patient from replenishment and wine and coarse foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if the condition prohibits any kind of nourishment, then let it be diminished from food and not approached with meat nor wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And apply to the wound, if an abscessing caut occurs to it, cotton soaked in rose oil or in wine where it has been steeped.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	More is it certain of the postrema cauter, then pause over the wound, if it is recent with blood and the air has not changed that powder which you will recommend to apply little by little.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then pause on the healing ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or is by incision of flesh and of similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted for stitches, then adjust them with a suture as you will recommend from the suture of others.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by them but only a small suspensor, then incise that and apply cure to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of putridness, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there is grossness: cabbage and beans and similar things to them, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the wound putrid rottenness and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that rotten part and throw it away, and apply cure to it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which a flow of blood can come, and it is not stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity provokes what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is humidity; thus you should powder those areas with a powder, which consolidates and dries the area before the air can infect them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take one part oil of anise, two parts resin of dragon, and three parts of unextinguished lime; let all be ground and crushed, and with it fill the wound, and constrain it with a good bandage until it adheres to the wound, and let it coagulate with the resin.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then bind that dressing with bandages and leave it on, and do not remove it while it is like this so that it does not become infected, because the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes make only a sole application, when you do not have anise and dragon resin at hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And perform this method of operation on large wounds when it is convenient that a dressing be placed over them and they be bound, and are recent wounds with their own resin, which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially in summer, then it is not suitable for the application of this powder, but rather cure them with what we have said, so that you apply on them certain digestive ointments, or you apply on them powders made from wheat flour mixed with water and honey until they form a paste; and then cure them with another remedy until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Most likely the pain occurs at the fracture site in the bone, and it is small, then extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will tell you about the treatment of head fractures in what is to be applied.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the sores of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Most likely if the sore occurs in the neck, then it is not different in medication, and between the sore of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	Most likely if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in the remedy but rather the treatment should be avoided with what causes vehement constriction, thus like cinchona and sage which are similar to veterinary and embalming treatments that harm the nerves and counteract that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply anything on the sore that causes excessive cold, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with light medicines, such as a warm bath, some ointment rubbed in oil, either rose or not, and turpentine when washed with warm water and the other poultices prepared according to this manner, and anointed humidly.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then administer a suture, or stitch the lips of it, and carefully cure that with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound has depth or reaches to the lowest part of the body, then pierce that in the most depressed place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an artery has already been cut in the wound and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or stop that, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the vertebrae of the throat or all have already been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with a suture on the cane of the throat and do not touch that; afterwards equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and place it with decent structure, and lift it for several days; and carefully cure it with plasters in which there is stripping and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then drill into that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can; and what is not useful to you, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and let it be separated and the pressure of it be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then powder on that powder which has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	More so if in the wound there is made a fistula, then treat it with that of which the memory will come back to the following chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or of similar things, when made between the shoulders and is made with a spatula or with a knife or with a lance or with similar instruments.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a perforation of a lance or of a knife, and observe its depth, then consider more so if from the wound there comes out blood and matter when the patient urinates; then know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent with his own blood, then you put on it from the first hour powder, and do not bind that which is not retained by the blood in the depth of it and which returns to the heart and which comforts the patient, but rather put on it a warm poultice, and apply those two remedies seen during the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the poultice is not at your disposal, then put on the orifice of the wound a cut vein so that it sucks what comes out of the humidities; and make that the patient sleep on the wound so that what is in it congeals.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the plague has already passed three days or more and does not cause spasms or tremors of the heart, nor constriction of the spleen, and the other good dispositions of the patient are present, then know that the plague is saved; and therefore treat it with warmth and apply another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of it is slowed, and enough time has passed, then know that a fistula has been made; therefore treat it according to the sixth chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is by a cut of a sword or a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then treat it with water that is preceded by stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If a judgment has already been made on the bone, and its edges are rough, then take a tourniquet and cut to extract those edges, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then loosen them until the wound suppurates, so that the extraction of them is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in youth is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ailments of the stomach.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the stomach is either great, or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great indispositions, some are seen in the intestine or the nerve of the intestine, because there is made an intense and subtle interruption of them and their suture.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And slight disruption is made difficult by another handling, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if not brought back to their place immediately, because it swells and becomes enlarged, for which the inner part of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two special cases mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suture of the stomach is according to four methods, but two sutures are common which are suitable for sutures of the other ailments of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures proper to it communicate with the other ailments, but however they are more proper in the suture of the stomach.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the ailment is slight and it emerges some cause of the intestine for that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then it is in one of two methods: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has come inflammation from the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And then when it is thus, at that time you should make a scalpel in such a way that you submerge a sponge or humid cloth in warm water alone, or that you take in hot water, cypress, and spikenard, and apply them to the intestine so that the inflammation may be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some times I have seen that in which there has been stipulated, and it is better than alone water in resolution of the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And then when you see the inflammation being resolved, at that time you moisten the intestine with water in which is mixed altaea and marsh marigold, because by it the entrails of the patient are alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the entrails of the patient are excused from this cure, then you should cut the disruption with a small instrument with which the incised and inflamed places are cut.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and not an occupation to cut, according to necessity and defect.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, know the shape of it:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp and pointed, and the other part not pointed, and the extremity is subtle, and not as subtle as a spatula, but rather a little obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is outside, it is necessary that its reduction be according to the natural form of it in its proper place, if possible above it, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs up so that their head is elevated; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head and chest higher than the lower parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your attention and consideration on this: that the part where the wound is should be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so it is necessary that you administer this in large wounds and in mediocre wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, place what you have prepared, and see to it that the minister is between your hands pressed, which holds the entire disruption with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and see that you uncover from this to that one who knows the suture for another cause.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or thread of needle according to the quantity of the size of the wound; and then release from the extremity of the disruption of the said finger, and hold the needle once, so that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the coding, with two extremities of the suture that is below the coding of the interior parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already joined two extremities of the coding and two extremities of the suture, and thus made four knots.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the thread with a double stitch around the edge of the wound, and also weave in some stitches from both parts at the same time, and then press together the two lips of the wound for a decent closure; and then push the thickness of the needle through and insert another needle in it, and then tie that one with thread just like you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary to use multiple needles until you have completed the entire closure of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be midway between thickness and fineness, for the fine needles easily penetrate the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to insert in the skin, and therefore it is desirable that they be moderate in both fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not desirable that the needle be fixed in both extremities of the skin too much, so that the flesh is not easily pierced and that the wound closes before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let the sutures not be prolonged, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient while he is sleeping; and place powders spread from all parts on the suture, which will hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these special threads of suture with needles in a certain manner are then more convenient for small wounds, where only one or two needles are needed around those areas.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suture is communal: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, of the spine and two extremities of the ribcage, in one way, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped finely and thickly.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that middle part where it began, so that the thread is pulled back from the lower most part of the wound, so that the suture is like a suture of fabric in which the fabrics are stitched together.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And leave between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the said mending thread.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture I have sewn the wound of a man who had been stabbed in his side by a knife, which was an injury one palm in length, and two palms from the intestine in the middle, and it was torn apart in the middle of the member; and then I returned that which the intestine had been outside the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around, and that one is cured; then return the viscera for many years, and it is converted into its natural dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it would not be cured; and by miracle it was made, for a certain ointment did not cure it, because it was in a place where no ointment nor medicine was effective, but rather placing a cloth soaked in two tablespoons of honey water with assiduous washing daily until it was cured.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But also they say there are two species of proper stitching according to the account of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the stitching of the intestine, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus with the needle penetrating the intestine and in that mesh weaving according to width and length of the entire body, and it leaves the extremity of the suture on which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inner part to the outer part in the other extremity of the thread.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that one penetrate, then you make another penetration in the same extremity of the thread from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the suture which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make penetrate with that your penetration, with which you make it penetrate into the spleen in the extremity of the liver, which is in the part of the intestine where everything penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin with this doctor's method and sew the extremity that is of the spleen on the other side, and pull out the needle from the codena which penetrated, and then put it back in that codena and sew the extremity of the spleen which is on the other side with this outer part of the liver; and pull out that one from the codena which is a part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make one suture and another, and then make one suture next to another suture, so that you sew everything that is deformed according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture of pellicies, with which you sew the skin, in such a way that you sew the spleen on one side of the extremity of the codena, and that you leave another suture until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	More the second special type of proper suturing which Gualia particularly recommends, and this is to be considered by you and recommended for you, is that you sew with a similar subtlety as that with which skilled doctors sew, in such a way that they add the whole part to its corresponding part, conveniently according to nature; and apply one extremity of another part to the other extremity, and this is done according to your recommendation.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you place the needle at the extremity of the mirror to your own height from the partition of the gold, and make it penetrate the partition of the inside in that sole, and release two extremities of the ciphac; then return the needle and make it penetrate again from the outside to the inside in two extremities of the ciphac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then return those tubes, and make each one penetrate from the inner partition to the golden partition in two extremities of the mirror's other sides that are on the opposite flank.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of sewing is better than the common sewing technique, and it is a sewing of which the preceding memory reminds.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more the teacher says, the sewing of the belly is corrected with two needles, it is that you insert in these each one a thread, and start with the insertion of the needle from what you have, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the sewing of those who sew the guts together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is a disruption in the middle place of the belly, then the sewing of it is more difficult than in the other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	More of the judgment of medical treatment of a wound is the judgment of other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause is that when you treat a recent wound with fresh blood being poured out, and the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine and cauterize it and dress it properly, then apply on it a stimulating powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply on it an ulcer ointment with which you have at hand so that they make a hard crust and cauterize the veins, and consolidate the liver and spleen; and properly cure it in the same way as the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply on it just as much as needed, since it begins to heal quickly, and change the dressing twice a day, as you and your teacher taught, until it is healed, because you did not need other medication in most cases when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound will communicate with the lesions of the principal members, then take a woolen cloth and submerge it in oil of tempered quality, or in rose oil, and apply it on the circuit of the places that are between the ankles and knees.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, where many purulent matters are accumulated, then consider it a sign of black bile, and more so if the intestine is perforated and an ulcer is formed penetrating into the cavity of the body.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	Know that the one which affects the large intestine is more likely to have a gentle cure than the one which is in the delicate intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult cure, for the intestine which is called "jejunum" does not receive healing from a wound that falls on it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of them that are in those, and by subtlety of the body of that, and by proximity of that to nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	More so if that which proceeds from the wound is the flesh, and you treat it newly, reduce it according to your rule by which you reduce the intestines in their place.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the space and already becomes green or black, then you should apply a faithful dressing on the spot that is stained by it, so that there come fluxes of blood, because in the flesh there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut that which is another ligament, and place two extremities of the dressing hanging from the part of the wound, so that on you be alleviated the attraction of it, by the falling of the flesh and emission of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the sores when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some men, for I have seen cases where a person who had been suffering from a wound in their stomach with a thrust of a lance and it was a wound on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and this came from bad digestion and bloating.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore I began the cure of what had already been treated so that it was not confused in the healing of it, but rather I proceeded to subtly treat the inside where the wound is healed and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I then applied a poultice on the patient because I had seen that the area was already consolidated; and I asked about the accident of the sickness in their stomach; and I didn't find any remedy for that evil accident, but rather I found that they were accustomed to eating and drinking excessively, and I advised them to take baths and exercise their intestines.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And they also suggested that some experienced practitioners said that when there is a wound in the intestine and it is small, it should be treated in this manner: that you take threads of big stitches; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those threads across the two lips of the wound, with its end exposed; so when you pull on them and tighten their end, it constricts the head of the wound, which adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then stop another poultice near the first one, and do not cease to make poultices one next to another according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and dress the wound; and let those attached capsules remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause harm to the patient with discomfort.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is tied with a thin thread which is made from the intestine of a beast attached to it, because it is thinner than a needle; and it is that you take the extremity of these threads of intestine, and it be very lean, and then tie the extremity of it with a thread, wrapped, and then insert this thread into needles and sew it to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of sewing with poultices is not based on anything except trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it is not an ingenuity but a subtlety, and it is not a complete healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess that becomes inflamed and chronic, and becomes an ulcer, and is not consolidated and suppurates for a long time and is not resolved, however, in any member it may be, it is universally called fistula, and we call it azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	Fistula is truly a nodular, hard, white swelling for which there is no pain and to which there is a sensation similar to that of a pinched intestine; and thus the name for this type of swelling is called a "pinched" or "compressed" stone, that is to say, a kidney stone.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some men a moist tumor, which discharges urine; and for which the moisture is cut off in a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And in some cases this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, that there are diseases, for which every ulcer that is not healed nor is it in its raw flesh, is not so except for one of nine causes: of which one is either for little blood in the body; or for malice of it; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing nativity of flesh; or because it is of moved leg; or because that ulcer itself is putrid and the matter that is passed through it is of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient in its cure; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or for property of region such as in Saragossa , where difficult digestion of diseases is made, and delayed healing of apostema by nature; or because there is a bone in it, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	It shows all those causes, and the signs of those and their cure with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary for you to know the cure of fistula, which is made by way of operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some of those are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed by composition like that of the hand and the foot; and of those which are close to the principal member and of similar things.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore one of these fistulas that follows this manner is of the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive cure, and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if one of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach to these places that have been said, and you hope and trust in its cure, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or of bronze, and if the fistula follows a straight path, and you require it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate with a probe of subtle lead, for lead that has the lightness of the body's humor is alleviated and cured by diverting the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has moved with horrible motions, it is not possible for you to signify upon it with the probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore purify the orifice with its orifices, for the humidity by which you cleanse that one goes away from the other orifices and corrects their flow.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire carefully, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the fistula's cavity is long and deep, or if it's a fistula with many orifices and this is all at the sum of your strength, in your penetration, in which you penetrate the patient, and the invention of pain through your compression on the area, and judgment of signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have established yourself upon all those causes with steady truth, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it's an apparent fistula near the surface or in a salty place, of joint length, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have told you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula according to what is said about the narration of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the heal and of similar things, and cure that within so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long and profound depth, and it is according to the rectitude, then you must insert in the wound as much as you can, and remove all the corrupted flesh; and administer hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do so until some visible results are seen, so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, so that it may be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is a bone and you must certify that, then you inquire into it and treat it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of a vein or of a nerve or of a main member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in it, then remove all the corrupted material; and treat that which remains with a remedy so that the flesh may be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and the arm remains as it was, then know that you have not achieved total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you uncover the area again with second intention and carefully make the reason for it and the purification of it with the last strong force, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep inner part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore you must not apply any ointment but rather lay a plaster on it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible to reach it, then you should reach it with subtle and suitable instruments.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully make the extraction of all those, and do not leave any of them in place due to lack of strength on your part.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If you find any cause of humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and scrape the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Moreover, if you have not prepared the hour for setting the bones of that part, then pause on the wound that you think will heal the wound, and leave it until it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so it does not become consolidated, and the section that you have made in your operation is constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having, if you suspect, pause on the cot (or affected area) submerged in a poultice of olive oil, or the cot submerged in Egyptian gum, or in a plaster of green wraps, because when those ligaments will heal, and the bones are separated from the abscess, and from that attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Moreover, if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface, then scrub that with resin only until such time as the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Moreover, if that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and to make an incision in the place where the corruption has pervaded, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you have a helper at your side, who will place and apply an example and assistant on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There is a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and from the affected parts it seems that the matter of the body has entered where the matter is made to reach the thigh, and it is a matter of a large abscess, and not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time is prolonged for this due to the error of doctors until the abscess has opened, and a gathering of pus and matter occurs, and its cure is delayed until the thigh becomes fistulated, and there are formed in the wound orifices which constantly discharged pus and humidity from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then a multitude of doctors treated him for about two years, and not with wisdom but in skill, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the thigh of his and the matter that flowed from it through those orifices with great force; and already the body of that man was completely corrupted and the color of it was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted my probe into one of those orifices and passed the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then carefully examine and probe all the openings and investigate those that penetrate to the entire limb.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I will cut and dissect above one of the openings that lead to where I discovered a part of the bone, and I found the corrupted one, which was rotten and corrupted and discolored; and a part of the limb was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I will wash what was discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I will extract that which is not in the bone but the corruption, which I will cut away and wash, and I had already destroyed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I will apply the restoration of the wound with medicine that consolidates for a long time, but it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I will treat and uncover the bone again, based on the first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will wash away that which appears to be from the corruption, and then I will make holes for the cure of it and its restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I will uncover it again and not cease to cut the small bone little by little, particularly, and make holes for its restoration, but it is not restored until I cut around an area of it, and that which I extracted from its marrow, and then I will restore it with medicines, and it is consolidated lightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on them except for the disposition of their frailty and due to the lack of tolerance of theirs and fear of theirs of death, because acidity occurs in them every hour due to an excess of evacuation without copious malady.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore it is healthy for total healing, and there is nothing in place of hard flesh; and the disposition of theirs is done well in their body and their strength returns; and it is established in their dispositions and does not cause contrariness in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	More often if there is a prominent bone in the body already wounded, then it is necessary that you cut that bone in this manner: and it is that you take a ligature and strengthen it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it in its; and take a ligature of coarse wool from the first ligature; and apply that ligature over the flesh that is next to the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts next to it, and you uncover the flesh around the area where you want to make an incision so that the incision does not damage the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And put a splint or board next to the bone properly, because when you do this it is not forbidden that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the closure be made on the corrupted spot little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to feeling, force the closure with the other visible aid.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, one part continues with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you discover all the flesh of all parts; and place your hand under them, and make a closure on that first part where the corruption is, until the closure of the other part is continued.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the closure be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut out that corrupted joint, and close the bone where it is continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in reason but ingenuity.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you open it, and mend it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with great ingenuity be rectified by you, when it does not cause discomfort or injury.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know that the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are chosen according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that it is necessary that you prepare all species of operation instruments convenient for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation refers to your knowledge of the species of instrument which you have indicated; when you have great study and lengthy and conscious understanding of the manners of this art, and testimony of the manners of illnesses, because then you have for yourself the means to apply what is convenient for each illness with instruments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And thus you will form at the end of this chapter the names of the instruments which you will pause with simples, and with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of yet another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of a large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a rasp:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this rasp be according to the form of the head of a starred nail, and its points be according to the form of the points of the anvil.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It does not suit unless the ends of the joints are rubbed when they are corrupted, or is the mouth wide open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a large razor for others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad or wide razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of a properly made saw: it is made with an arch-shaped iron edge and the sharpness of the iron, and the handle of the tool is decently made.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it or its shape/form:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of a razor in which there is a hollow:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle or fine razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small scraper resembling a file:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of a cutter with which the bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller cutter:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutter; this resembling a saw, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is used in many places for cutting the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a saw that suits for sawing what is perforated by the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and with a pointed extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made from iron of India, and similarly it cures all the causes that we have spoken of regarding abrasions and incisions and wounds.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incisions of extremities and of the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, and when you have treated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure is not effective, sometimes the corruption worsens to the point where it must be cut off, then it is necessary to cut off that member in which the corruption has taken hold, so that the patient may escape from death or malignancy which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which has befallen, is that the member becomes black until it seems to be burned by fire, or it becomes weak and the blackness spreads until the decay enters into that member and seizes the whole body; and then it is time to proceed with the cutting of that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if it is a cause of the corruption, a sting from some venomous things such as the scorpion's tail or of the viper or of the rue or of similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the sting is in the extremity of the said, then you cut off the said and do not give space to the corruption so that it may not spread to the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you approach the hand, then you inspect that for rot of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it swells, then inspect the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond and the swelling reaches the elbow, then in that case it is death for the patient; and to administer another cause or treatment at this point is a matter of quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, make for the foot when corruption swells the said part of the foot, then you inspect it up to one of the nails.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then you inspect the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	More, if it reaches inside the tooth, then you inspect the leg up to the joint of the tooth.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the tooth, then in him it is not a remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of inspecting the member or of cutting it is that you stretch the ligament in the affected area where you want to inspect, and stretch another ligament over the location; and extend the minister a ligament to the affected areas, and extend the ministeress another ligament on hers; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that all the flesh may be discovered; and then it is inspected or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that a cloth be placed over the entire affected area so that nothing touches it, and that a warm poultice or plaster be applied to the wounded area.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if there is an excessive flow of blood when you operate, then cauterize the area carefully, or apply to it some powders that restrain the blood; and return to your treatment once the bleeding has stopped.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and take care of it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that which I have found to be beneficial for someone with pain in their foot, this accident which I and you have recommended, which is because the blood accumulates in the foot due to a condition that was caused by an inflammation of heat.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption occurs mainly in the right foot, until it reaches the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself such that his doctor visits him to apply the treatment to the limb with the violence of what he suffers from pain and inflammation, and it happens that the foot reaches the joint, and thus heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time passes before this corrupted disease appears in the right hand of the affected person.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And thus I come to myself, and I have thoroughly considered the removal of that excess which is placed on the hand of medical treatments, according to the purification of the body of the patient; and if the excess does not recede, then begin to anoint the other said interior with which begins in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the patient's hand made me understand, and I did not want to do that which is expected regarding the removal of that excess, and more than I feared the incision of the patient's hand, because the virtue of the sickness was in a precarious state.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he has departed from me, he returned to his own land and it came back to me that that man prepared and incised his whole hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narration except to be an aid regarding that which is caused by this sickness, and that it be a signification for what is signified and according to which it is worked.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the cure of sins and the quality of purging with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses occur in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of blood, and then it is broken and perforated, and the blood comes out, and the place is left empty as if it were a vessel, and the cloth that is put on it is like a delicate drap, and it does not allow dirt to accumulate, and it does not press on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Worse will be if the space is prolonged until the corruption affects some member, then it is called fistula and not gout.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for it is that you cut out the entire cord thus as it is turned, and mainly when it is subtly made with a cloth, and constrictions that do not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Worse if you hope that the cord adheres and that the corruption has not been achieved by consecutive treatment, and in the cord there has been a passage of stool, then your cure is to give an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you make is of foul-smelling dung, then clisterize with this medication from Egypt, which is made of oil and bitter vinegar and juniper, received in small portions, and adjusted in a vessel, and put on the fire until the medication becomes liquid and penetrates to the species of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take the liquid that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and clisterize it into the sinus, and strengthen the opening of it, and let the medicine stay in it for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that with precision; and do so for as many days as needed until the sinus is cleaned and the pus is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is cleansed with water of cinder, when this medication is not present to you; and it is that you take the cinder of wine, and mix it with water; and then glue that and cleanse him with it until you confirm that the sinus, then, is closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medication or the water of cinder, then cleanse him with water and honey which has been mixed with ground ginger, and cleanse him with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it cleans and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this sometimes and confirm that the sinus is already cleaned, then cleanse him with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take the plaster of dyaphonicum and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you cleanse him with some medications and other plasters which have properties that I have already written in the treatise on plasters.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is too narrow for the reception of the cannula of the clyster, then you will enlarge it little by little with a small iron tool, and place it in a warm wrap soaked in Egyptian or basilicum ointment until it becomes enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is large, then you will sew the lips of it with a suture and adjust the quantity in which the clyster enters.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of that from which the arm protrudes is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lowest place where it is in you through which the arm runs, for when the arm is constricted in the profundity of the sinus the flesh will be engendered there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus through the lowest bone according to your will, then prepare the member with preparation so that the arm can run freely as it should be, and that nothing should be retained that could cause retention of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are applied to the sinus, conveniently adapted to what you want to extract those on a cloth of linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of as great a quantity as is necessary for the communication with the entire sinus; and then insert in the right place of the orifice of the sinus a tube slightly larger than the orifice of the sinus; and then spread on another cloth of linen ointments of lion according to the quantity of the tube, and apply it on that place for a long time on the orifice of the sinus so that the heaviness of the arm is alleviated and the cloth does not obstruct, but rather anoints the diseased area one time.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	More of that which is above the orifice of the sinus, which you massage at all times so that it comes to be adjusted in the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to know if that which runs from the arm is movement or little, or is digestion, or is not-digestion.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is applied to the orifice of the sinus already adhering, or its own adherence, then you might apply it on the third day, and when you apply the plaster, then change the dressing for another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus its own space emits subtle mucus, then do not despair of its adherence, for the healing of it is proper, for thus it closes wounds in which slow generation of flesh in the aforementioned plagues occurs, and of those in which the opposite of it is made.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus for many days there is discharge of undigested arm, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its cause prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medications, and if the medications are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as an ointment of diafinicon, when there is adjusted superflluity of addition of discharge.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the more immediate remedy by which it is cured, is that one takes ointment of diafinicon and dissolves it in heated oil, and applies it to the affected area with an old cloth in its substance, and wraps it around the patient, and uses that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, ointment of diafinicon, as much as it is cooked until it becomes thick, and uses it; or one takes myrrh and wool and ashes, and grinds everything and powders it over the honey which is on the fire, and wraps that in a cloth and tightens it around the sinus; and wraps that with the honey which you have cooked until it becomes thick, and powders it on a cloth and tightens it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And some remedies are administered to the patient with aristology, long roots and celestial lily (which is celestial lily) and flour of dragons and centaury, and uses those simples or adjusts, grinds those and sifts and powders them over the honey which has been recommended; and gives it to him.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the patient's chest, and it makes an inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular cure, as it is said previously.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of afflicted nails and injured fingers and the cutting of added toes and the division of.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	A panarici is an abscess which forms on the nail of the thumb or big toe of the hand or foot, and also appears on other toes, and as it progresses its treatment is highly prized, or it is cauterized with a hot iron, or it becomes corrupted, and it causes the root of the nail to rot, and soon corrupts the entire nail, and soon exposes its corruption to the bone which has a foul odor, and the extremity of the affected part becomes black, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And then when you have that on the hand as we have said in the division and you don't confuse your treatment, then it is good that you cut away all the excess that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound immediately, for a hot cauterization is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already begun to grip the flesh at the roots, and start to pierce it and cause pain, then it is good that you apply a subtle remedy beneath the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and press it gently upwards and cut away the flesh with ease, and apply on top of that what remains of the flesh the corrosive medicines that will consume all the bad parts; and then treat that area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone and extract it, for no time is healthy when the corrupted bone is in the body.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the decay and corruption have reached the finger, then incise it on one of the nodes according to where the memory of the pain is pressed, and carefully treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If the nail has received a blow or an injury, and there is violent pain in it, then it is necessary that you begin by bloodletting the patient, and immediately cut the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting transversely from below to above, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate the flesh that is beneath the nail, because you would cause the patient violent pain, and it would be a cause for the generation of excess flesh in the area; and treat that place with what relieves the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But a well-adjusted finger, which is born in the hands of some men, is strong in all its flesh, and strong in its bones, or strong in its nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born from the root of the joint, or it is the generation of them in certain nodes of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Worse is he who is born with pain in his joints, and this one who is born with strong joints is not injured.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those who are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you should insert the root with a spatula blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Worse for he who is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the abscession of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Worse in he who is born with fingers of the toes, it is that you should insert at the beginning the flesh of it with rounded incision into the bone, and then cut with one of those convenient scissors to this, and then cure what will be healthy inside.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Worse consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their worn-out joints or by birth of the man who is born thus, or by consolidation of a wound or by combustion of fire, or by resemblance, therefore it is that you should cut that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between the clothes of the swollen feet with oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between them, or put between them a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated as it is fitting.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of the palm's digits, then you should dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of veins, these are varices.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varices, and they are enlarged veins filled with melancholic superfluities which appear in the form of swelling on the limbs of the body, and the main occurrence of them is in the thighs, especially in the thighs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, we advise that you administer a purge of the body for black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that the vein should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be elevated and all of it extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning of it is according to this method: at the beginning, immerse the thigh in hot water until the gross blood is dissolved, which purges the thigh, and then tightly bind the patient's thigh to the upper part of the hip with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with the hand that holds the lower part of the thigh inside it, and from inside to outside, until there comes out the quantity of blood that you want and that is sufficient, and which the virtue of the patient can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then treat that area, and order them to abstain from foods that cause black bile to form.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And the cure is achieved by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this brings no relief to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	More elevation is achieved in this manner: you raise the patient's leg, if it is mobile, and then put it in a bath and immerse the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are full; or it can be exercised by strong movement, if a bath is not available, until the member is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then sear the vein in the right area by section in the length or in the back of the arm near the elbow, or in the lowest part of the arm near the heel.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then uncover the vein with a knife and scrape the vein from every part until it becomes apparent to feeling, and it is near the appearance of what seems to be a blackish cord declining to darkness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then as you evacuate and from the vein you see that white thing which seems to be a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you put the patient's arm in a sling until it is elevated and removed from the vein, and suspend it with a bandage or a linen cloth.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut the other section and then cut that section for three days, and then scratch the skin of the affected part above the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and insert it into the last section of the heel, and then pull it out and lift it until it is extracted through the second section, and then pull it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the section that is most superficial or highest of all the sections, until everything is extracted; then insert it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey your attempt to extract and lift, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and pull it out, or insert the instrument beside the vein and turn your hand in every direction until it is discharged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not inserted; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift the dead flesh and it will come upon the patient for that nuisance.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the entire thing is discharged, then apply on the place of the wound a woolen pad soaked in wine and oil, both rose oil and non-rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vita is contracted having twisted the part which is enveloped by the partitions, and it's not according to rectitude as we have said, then it is necessary that you make a ligature on that entire affected part of the twisting of it and on the areas of its enveloping, and place your suspensor above it with an unguent that elevates it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that you do not cut the vein and that you do not harm it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your discretion in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Figure of the incision by which the vita is severed:
Forma de unci orp:	Figure of a single hernia (or perhaps "figure of a navel" or 
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not to the hernia that is accustomed thus as with the intestines nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of thick flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; but it has in it a superfluous thickness thus as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in cold and damp lands, just like in the land of Arabs and in the dry and arid lands of little tenderness, and in which there is neither grass nor tree.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And for this reason it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gestation of it is from putrefaction that comes from the decomposition of the body, as when worms and snakes and lice and worms are generated between the rot and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the signal of the reception of its coming is from this vein that violently inflames in the leg; and then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein starts to exit from the area of that blister, which seems to be a root of plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears, then take and wrap around that one piece of lead, whose weight is one dram or two drams, and tie it and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see that something is going out of place, wrap it in lead and tie it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the movement is prolonged, then you cut a piece of it and wrap the remainder; do not cut that from the root until it is completely removed, because if you cut it, it becomes contracted and enters into the flesh and causes an abscess and pus to form in the area and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it may be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is removed from the back of the patient and no remainder of it stays in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein there comes out in some men what is in its length of 5 palms and thickness, and it has already seemed to me that one comes out of 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it happens at the time of its medication, then introduce the needle into the hole of the patient and puncture that long channel in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then treat that place for the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes moves to the muscles, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to the patient many horrible pains, and it exits from each horrid muscle branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus treat that one as we have said in the division with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called cow disease or bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some lands by us as bovine disease because many times worms appear to the cattle and it is a little worm which is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and tearing, and shows itself to our feeling from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of it is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just like what happens with worms and snakes and intestinal parasites in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then it strongly oppresses it and enters and destroys the brain, and this causes many visible evils.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure it and extract it, then it is not done if you do not first move its sentiment and appearance, and then remove what is on it and what is below it with ligature and strong constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not touch it, then apply a cautery with fire to the place where it is, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place, as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if you see that it has reached the head near the brain, then tighten above the eyebrow with strong pressure, and dry out the place, and extract it; and advise the patient to use purification of their body with medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the division above the nausea.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called nausea in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And already I have seen that thing which I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been treated for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away just as if the blood was rising to this place, more quickly than it is possible for it to be, just as if it were silver, I saw how it flows from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I put the needle in the pain of that place and inserted it into the muscle, and then I left it there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I ran to the other side of the body until I reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to me that it revolves throughout the entire body according to what I had seen; and I was very marvelled by the permutation of it and by the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen it beforehand in my wheels according to that manner, however I have seen many times the ones that take pain being transferred from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	More pain is not seen with these humors as in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And it is not thought to be the cause but rather that it is because of this that the woman was of vile habits and had a dry body and exposed veins, and in this case appears the sentiment of altered flatulence.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward curvature in those who are delicate and have a humid body with filled veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear to them as we have said, but rather press upon that area and place a light and dry dressing on it until the flatulence is driven out, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not often see the humors, then cure that one with evacuation of the body and with that which expels flatulence, and purge those with fetid pills and with pills of serpent and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of arrowheads.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrowheads are diversified according to species, and according to the locations of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some of them have large points, and small ones, and concave, and blunt, so are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have quills.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is secondary to the limbs and the weights in which case it falls is secondary to two manners: for the limbs or so principal members concave, such as the brain, the heart, and the liver, and the lung, and the kidneys, and the intestines, and the bladder, and their similar parts; and then when you cut into one of these members and you remove your suspicions of death, which cause you to recount, then you cover, because you want to avoid extraction of that arrow in those in which death is not so much in that in which the major dispositions, and when it does not appear to you this bad suspicion, and the arrow is not stuck in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the wound it is when you cut into the arrow, and it pierces the bone, and there comes out from the siphac that which is above the brain, because it happens through the violent flow, and scotomia, and dizziness, and rigor in the limbs, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the voice is hoarse and speech is destroyed, and there comes out from the place of the wound a white humidity resembling a poultice, and it seems to be similar to the flesh that has been wounded.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And thus if this symptom appears to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	More symptoms of the arrow when it is in the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and it seems that it is fixed in a hard mass, and not a hollow cause; and for this reason the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and coldness of the black wound, and dryness, and shivering, and syncope; and thus you will know that death is descending upon them suddenly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms when the arrow has wounded the lung are expectation of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient is changed, and they exhale a great deal of cold air, and ask for a cooling attraction of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow is in the membrane which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it is made with great and vehement pain and with sighing, and not all the members of the muscles are moved.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow is in the stomach, then for this reason the eyes of the wound will be bloody and somewhat indigestible matter.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is in the stomach, and it's fixed in him, there is some tear of the wound, or the tissue, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure of the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow is in the bladder, and urine comes out of it, and because of this some cause is released to the outside, and for him there is pain on the patient, then know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members like the face, the neck, and the shoulder, and the shoulders and the joints of the back, and the arm pit and the thigh, and the leg, and their similar members, are saved according to their major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand by this regarding your own cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is the cause, for when a man receives an arrow in the tear duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him through the other side, leaving the gray matter of the aurelha ( possibly referring to a membrane or tissue) intact, and he was healed, and no harm remained in the eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	Extract the other arrow from a Jew's eye, which had fallen into the mucus of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be retrieved except for a small extremity to which it adhered on the surface of the flesh, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with an iron tip on which there were no wings.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was a senator, and the accident did not occur in his eye badly by chance.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And he extracted another arrow from a Christian man, which had fallen into the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and this one had wings; and then he carefully worked on that area between two guides, and it was already submerged in the man's throat; and then he skillfully removed it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And he extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his stomach, and it was thought that he would die from it; but since after making him wait for xxx days and not seeing any change in him due to the disposition of his condition, he carefully worked on the arrow and skillfully removed it, and the man was healed, and the accident did not turn out badly.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and since he was made to sit for seven years, the arrow went to the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I see a woman who has an arrow in her upper abdomen, and the wound is consolidated within her, and it does not change her natural dispositions, and the woman does not suffer harm in some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I see another man who has an arrow in his face and the wound is consolidated, and the arrow remains, not causing much pain, and showing few symptoms of this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes which was lodged in the middle part of the upper nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to his cure when the arrow was lodged within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow very tight; and then I inquired into that with a subtle probe, and did not feel it; but she felt it when I pricked the right ear, and then I inferred that this prickling was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster to the place with an emplastrum in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, trusting that the place would reveal to me where the arrow was lodged, so that I could cut above it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it does not happen in the location of the significant accident that the arrow has reached that place; and you will continue with the plaster on it for many days and it does not happen accidentally; and the wound is consolidated meanwhile, and the patient frees himself from the extension of it by space of many days until one day he feels the arrow inside his nose and retrieves it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you will place on the wound acute corrosive medicine for many days until it is opened, and with the probe you will investigate that, and extract the extremity of the subtle arrow, which adheres to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you will adjust on the surface of the wound with that acute medicine until it appears visibly to me the extremity of the arrow, and I will wait for the time with it for the space of time until four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then since the wound is enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I will manipulate that, and not be obedient to excess, then I will not cease to subtly ingenuity and engineer on it with manners of ingenious device, until one day on those manners of ingenious devices hanging it with forceps, according to how the form of those will appear at the end of the chapter, until I extract it; and then I will restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored, yet it is restored and the wound is consolidated, and health is given to the patient through complete healing, and nothing bad happens to them for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some sayings because you pause and give rule and meaning to what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood by narration nor does the book comprehend them freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisan compares little by word; and what is present to what is absent; and finds new operation and new instrument suitable for the descending of the strange causes of the art when accidents happen.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the members in which they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction of the place where it enters; or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is ejected through the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy place, and is attracted and ejected.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the effort of the hour in which you take it, then it is good that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purulent, and the attraction of it and its ejection become easier.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is fixed in the bones and does not obey your efforts, then leave it for several days and repeat this with attraction and massage each day, and it will already be discharged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your efforts for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow on that bone of the entire affected part with a subtle instrument until the area of the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and many of those accidents appear which I have said and told, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave it until the sickness can be treated for several days; because if the arrow perforates the diaphragm, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not fixed in the bone of the body only and does not pass into the diaphragm, and the patient remains for several days, and none of those accidents occur, then put your effort into the attraction of the arrow and in the traction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	More often if it is deeply fixed and does not obey your extraction, then you administer instruments in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and carefully treat the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already lodged in the body and it's lodged in a sensitive area, then you inquire about the extent of the injury, and if you feel it, then you draw out the arrow with instruments suitable for the attraction of it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins here, then make an incision on the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it has reached the ears, which are held back, then cut the flesh in which it is embedded with all the skill you can; and operate above that, if you cannot operate on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting of them until you reach the bone.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location it may be, then use twisting of your hand with force on all sides until it makes that obey; and proceed with subtle subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it becomes difficult to attract it and to extract it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on that at your hour, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in the area of it can be cleansed, and then return to it when it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you find opposition in the flow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in the sixth chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your skill of incision in the vein or nerve, or cord, and administer gently in all manner possible for the evacuation of the arrow; and do this with facility and tranquility and slowness and firmness as you have recommended and advised.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then make the arrowhead contract so that the disease is according to the figure according to which you should remove the arrow from him, because it is more judicious.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrowheads that are pushed out by the opposite of the other party, or that already proceed from it to the outer parts, or that cause bulging of the extremity of the arrow due to feeling of the part most susceptible to the gland that is proposed and also that one; then you cut concerning that; and let the cutting be according to the quantity in which the forces take hold; and then pull out that, because it is made lighter for extraction.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the limb according to opposition so that the arrow presses into the bone, and increase to your grips, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then return and insert it into what will hold it.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the thrust of the needle is in it, then you will press it with your hand.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the thrust has failed and you want to administer an impulse, then you will introduce it, and if it is numb, push gently so that it enters the cavity of the body through the eye of the needle and press it with your hand.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the needle is hollow, then you will press it strongly entering into it, because the needle is relieved by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the needle is poisoned, then take care to hollow out all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then treat it with what is suitable.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the needle is in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is near so that you can touch it with your fingers, and it is possible for you to feel it, then feel it and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then sew the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of the forces by which the arrows are propelled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The extremities of their hands are like a bird's beak, which are made with a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those are made many special remedies, large, small and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its poverty, and of the width of the wound, and of the constitution of the patient.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of an implant concave to this hollow extremity, similar to a bird's nest, so that the arrowhead is alleviated in it, and impulse of the said swelling:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of an implant for a swollen extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	as a rod, so that it is alleviated in the arrow's hollow and it is implanted with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy, of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy, are: the two pulsating veins that are near the ears, called temples; the two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and the two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes, called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and the two guides that are at the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lip; and the two veins that are on the lower lip; and — these are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are under the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	More than the veins that are called fleubotomized in the arms is known; for one of those is a cephalica, and it's from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it's deaf, and it's a middle vein, and it's composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and the people name that one "vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and it's named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it's placed above the elbow, and it's that one which is fleubotomized, and it's that one which appears on the thumb for apparent appearance; and salvatella, and it's the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest finger, and it's in the two arms.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of those is which is near the curve of the hollow of the wild lettuce; and the second is sophena, and its place is near the leg of the domestic lettuce; and the sciatic vein, and its place is near the leg of the wild lettuce; and in the leg are other similar veins to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The swelling of the veins that approach the ears is treated with ancient remedies and migrations and saffron and ulcers of the bad head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of treating those veins is according to what you have recommended to me: that the head of the patient should be shaved, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the occiput, in the place of the two veins with a warm and good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a bandage so that the two ears and the places of them approach the ears in two depressed places of the head; and feel that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here put a tent.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the surgical knife, and it is that which is incident, and then insert it into the vein in the tube where the blood flows to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then lift your hand with the vein and the tube to the separated parts and cut the vein with a cutting incident on the incident cut.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let as much blood come out as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply poultices and dress it so that it will be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already in the beginning of the book, the incision of those and their cauterization has been preceded.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arteries that are near the temples, youth of phlebotomy is an ancient migration and poorly managed and assiduous eye disease and body of acute superfluous effusions to the veins.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomy on those is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient with a tight bandage, so that the two veins appear at the feeling for apparent manifestation and it is demonstrated by the pulse of their wrists; then you will feel it with your finger.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the skin above the vein to the parts of the wrist, and insert the phlebotomy needle, and raise the vein in this way; and cut that one as you have done on the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constraint of the patient, and let your finger stay on the vein for an hour, and then apply a poultice and powders and bind that area with a strong bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the reminder of them, and of those the incision, has been preceded in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Therefore the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is closely related to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient facial ailments and for migraines, and also for foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; thus it is that the patient holds their arm with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument, which is called a lancet, whose form is this:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the prominent point which is at the head of the lancet on that vein and pierce it with a pen or other instrument in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the pressure of the patient and hold it tight until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened with a broad phlebotomy, however it is not suitable that the phlebotomy be of an acute extremity like the other phlebotomies, but rather of a broad extremity, and perform the phlebotomy according to the transverse, because the bone is prominent and strong, and the flesh is delicate in the area where the phlebotomy is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More importantly, the treatment of the two veins that are like the lachrymal vessels of the eyes for diseases of the eyes due to heat and mucus in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient should hold the neck with a bandage, and apply the bloodletter to those areas, and you stand on the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let bloodletting be done according to the transverse length a little above the bloodletter a little, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletter is subtle, then the extremity of the patient is cut.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And let flow as much blood as is necessary for you, and place on those cuts, and bind them with a bandage, and then separate those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More, the bloodletting of the vein of the nose is convenient for acute fever and violent cough, and for the illnesses of the face and migraine and pain that occur in the face, and especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting of it is that the patient should hold the neck and you should put the left hand to the nose, and take a subtle lancet and place it in the middle place of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to feeling here, and so the blood begins to flow at once.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Take care that you touch your hand to the bloodletter little by little and make flow the blood according to your necessity; and then tie it with a bandage, because it is restored lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Mainly the youth of phlebotomy guides to a construction of pain and a beginning of leprosy and to motives of sickness and petidity and bad ulcers corrosives, as with herpetic symptoms.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that the patient holds each one in their hand with a ligature; and let the artisan be above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then phlebotomize the vein with a long lancet, little by little; and extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed, as necessity dictates; and then make a similar appearance on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then untie the ligature and bind the two veins with a moderate tightness so that the patient is not suffocated, and let him go to the mat where the wound will be healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the youth of phlebotomy of the Algerian veins cures little aposthems and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the circle of it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and bind their neck with a bandage, and then turn back their lips and look at the two veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of them, and moreover it is because in the circle of those there are small black veins; and then you make an incision on each one with a careful incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Mainly if you are in doubt, and do not know which one of them it is, then intend to make an incision on the most prominent and visible one of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make a similar thing for the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Mainly it is customary to cut the two veins that are on the left lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Mainly of the two veins that are on the tongue, the procedure is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic, for afflictions that are in the throat, and for illnesses of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy on those is that it follows the illness between your hands in front of the patient, and elevates the tongue of them, and looks at the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is leaning towards black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not cut your hand while phlebotomizing them, because on the other side of them are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized on the elbow are in which it is customary for all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods, or they put on the phlebotomy a mitigating or olive oil with subtlety; or they use a sharp lancet, and apply it if necessary, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this gentleness is what suits the section and those special threads, both thick and thin, according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of vein cutting surgery:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The threads of the patient's vein, as many times as necessary, and it is suitable to open the convex full veins showing apparent thickness, and also those that contain thick blood clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive vein cutting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this vein cutting is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it suits the cutting of thin veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Most importantly the operation of cutting the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the illnesses that are in the liver and the colon, and from that which passes to the chest and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is suitable for the vein cutter, when cutting that vein, to be cautious and fearful of that, because there is an artery near it, and if he misses and makes a mistake in the puncture of the vein cutting, he will injure that artery and cause a flow of blood, so that it is advised not to cut that vein with a pointed instrument, but rather to cut with a gentle one.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear through obvious manifestation, then it is necessary that you leave that one and that you move to another, or that you search for a certain branch of it; or that you perform phlebotomy in place of the end of the arm, because that is obvious; and dry that one with phlebotomy as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform phlebotomy on the middle arm, then it is necessary that you tighten the stricture of the arm where you touch the place until you constrict the place of the pulses, and place a needle on the thin part of the arm; and tie the arm and dry the vein with a concave section using phlebotomy as we have said; and beware that the percussion does not hit the space of the place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, with the ligature loosened, inflammation in the place where you have made an incision on the thin part, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore evacuate that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the phlebotomy like the urine of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; and then touch and stop your hand on that one for a long space; and place your hand, and if the blood is separated, because many times it is separated, then tighten the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Watch over the patient for the movement of their bowel, and be in dread of it and do not let them eat anything for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the blood does not separate, and you see that medicine is not present, then you will cut the artery if it appears to you; because the extremity of the patient is contracted, and the blood is separated; or you will take a piece of tape, and apply it, and take one bandage and tie it tightly over the area of the vein with strictness and with bindings until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is separated, it is good; and if not, then treat that with the treatment of that which precedes the memory of the place of the poultices where blood flows.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the separation of the blood from it is difficult in many cases due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	From the dark vein, phlebotomy is a remedy that extracts blood from the inferior part of the head and the right side of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And warn the one who performs phlebotomy to be in dread of it during the procedure, because there is a nerve; and therefore if they make an error in the puncture of the phlebotomy and hit the nerve, it will cause stupor to the patient, and their healing will be difficult, and perhaps they will not be healed at all. And this nerve appears visible to sensation; but if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and not shown, then warn that you should place the phlebotomy instrument with which you perform the procedure with caution, and avoid the nerve with your carefulness.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then make an incision in the length of the vein.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws out the blood from the head and relieves the ailments of the veins.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And cover this properly, if you want to make a phlebotomy with an olive stick or myrtle stick; for it is the safest of all veins, since there is neither artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	It is more advisable for you to do phlebotomy with caution, that with the lancet you do not puncture just the head of the vein, and search for the easiest place, and do not harm it, unless it is confirmed by the primary percussion that there are some evacuations on that phlebotomy site.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But it is often the case in some people, when there is no evacuation in the primary percussion, that it does not harm to cause an abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of that phlebotomy and its accidents are so many, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing to consider is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for hope of it and caution of the onset of illnesses, and that it should be done on one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, cubital and basilic; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter after digestion, when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let a phlebotomy be performed on the third day or on the first day after three hours have passed from the beginning of the illness.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more phlebotomy is administered, the more it provokes convenience and necessity for that, either at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is said that if a child is under 14 years old, it should not be phlebotomized, and a pregnant woman should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month or seventh, and the elderly who have passed 60 years should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be phlebotomized in any manner, it is said that one should purge the lower intestines before phlebotomy with a cleansing enema, if there is retained feces, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are purified, and do not nourish the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are nauseous, or have chills, or cramps, nor those with a sickness or fever until it is reduced, nor those with dropsy, should not be phlebotomized. More so, because phlebotomy is contraindicated for colic passion and vomiting, and abdominal pain, and the multiplication of coughing and labor and exercise of fasting or vigil, and any cause that dissolves virtue, whether it be corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider in subtlety of humors if the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medications if it is possible for him to take them.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter into bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or it is exercised by some exercise so that the blood is thinned.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the phlebotomy on him in the morning, around the hour of tierce, as we have already said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And be careful that the patient is guarded that day from all bad accidents and animals, as well as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as turmoil and excessive sorrow and worry and appearances of similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his chamber, let the causes be present in the use of that which customarily belongs to men with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the one performing the phlebotomy sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the blood from the arm, and let the phlebotomist rub it with his hand two or three times; and then tie the ligature with a strap and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if it is a moderate constriction, because the constriction when not excessive, or the constriction is with an excess, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then it prohibits the body from excessive blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then apply the constriction, so that one who must be a bloodletting expert should rub their hands together between them so that the veins are inflated, and declared to sensation.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the bloodletter anoints his hand with a little ancient oil properly; and then lets his right hand index finger rest on that vein, at the location where he wants to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein is slightly opened, and the stroke is controlled because among the veins it is the one you find like a cord running away from the bloodletting, and of those it is full of windiness and when you apply the bloodletting on that one it is constricted before the bloodletting, and the bloodletter is discovered; and the bloodletting does not miss the vein, and if it misses, that one is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for this reason, it is required that the bloodletter be firm and solicitous in all these cases.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then pause the phlebotomy, unless the vein is exposed in a good location, which is good; and if not, you will proceed to another location, placing a small cushion under them, or above them with a bandage, if the area is not contaminated.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is contaminated, or the patient is weak, then you will let it be for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because a strong tightening could cause a contagious infection, nor enter into bathing.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then proceed with the phlebotomy if it is loved (or desired), likely meaning "if it is needed" or "if it is necessary".
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and you fear subtly that it will not be enough of what you want, then you will proceed with the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust on the perception a small one, and make this with a bandage beforehand so that the area does not become contaminated, because the area becomes contaminated in most homes for lack of a small perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Unless the area has already become contaminated, then do not proceed with it, because it does not excuse any of your actions; and stop on that particular part of the olive oil bandage, because it soothes the body from the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place to use olive oil than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer an ointment of oil in all phlebotomy, in which phlebotomes the veins to prohibit the flow of blood, and make a tyrical preparation with sage and hazel, when one of these is placed on the area, so that the blood is thinned and revolved when it is gross.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the area of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, so that many dressings are needed, and especially for one who has not been bled but only dressed, or in the opening of the small vein, then you apply, and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and hold it for an hour, until it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover the orifice of the blood of that vein with a plaster in complement of it or of another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if a blackness or greenish color remains in the area for some days, do not be concerned; and if you wish, apply on that area a paste of aloes or of ground mirra dissolved, or a paste of mint juice or of chamomile or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Many dressings are needed for abscesses and swellings that come from phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then stop your hand over that, and if you find a softness there, apply compression, because if that prominence is bad and evil; and therefore be careful not to stop on any cause of what we have said, for the flow from the arterial blood will be strong.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a plaster for that which has contracted, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take out of the blood all that which comes from a man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears on the blood as it is apparent.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it come out until it becomes red; and likewise if you see it thick, then let it come out until it becomes subtle; and likewise if it is sharp, until the acuteness of it becomes dulled.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And take for the one who is full and strong and needs blood extraction in a single occasion, that phlebotomy of the vein should be amplified and the phlebotomist should be skilled.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in one who is frail, the opposite of that should be done, and take that blood is extracted in multiple occasions, and that the vein is strict.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is saved from flow of blood and from injury of nerves, and it is more useful and more safe than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is accustomed to happen syncopes after the phlebotomy, and it is good that you prepare before the phlebotomy with a little of warm infusion of milk or simple oxymel; and extract from the blood in three or four withdrawals.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a coldness of complexion, then take before the phlebotomy an infusion to warm with a syrup of mirra or with a flavored syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or with a fragrant and smelling syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncopes occur after the phlebotomy, and it is caused by the issuance of much blood, then it is good that you take in drink water of carnation and syrup with subtle fragrant smell; and use aromaticity with a sponge, and anoint the chest with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And whoever wants to evacuate their own arm and dissolve their own blood, take the one for which phlebotomy is for prompt evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, as is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuing days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	However, whoever wants to evacuate their own arm and let out their own blood a second time, and their body is strong, then do this close to the seventh or ninth hour of the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to attract the blood of their body against the contrary of the part to which it declines, should be evacuated on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is much blood already and it is sharp and causes fever, should have its blood let out once and a large quantity of it should be let out and the aperture should be widened until syncopy occurs, since you have conserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and put your hand on the pulse of the one from whom the blood is being let, so that death does not occur in place of syncopy, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not attempt to when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the second vein, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to extract blood, that you press strongly on that area with vehemence and the elbow is extended, for this is very bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the incision in such a way that it is a secondary phlebotomy; or let that be with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that coagulates the blood at the orifice of the vein; or apply on that area of tyrical or sage-like, and compress with gentle compression so that the blood comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity provokes you to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then prick that area or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "cord of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the ulnar or basilic, when they are not blocked or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient puts their hand in cold water so that the vein becomes more swollen and the vein appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then tighten it over that limb with a moderate stricture in the middle; and apply a flea-bite according to the transverse smallness, not lengthwise nor according to the longitude.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the opening be wide and let your flea-biting be such that you bite just above the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then put the hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from the treatment of the hand in hot water, and it is better to bathe the body in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the flea-biting of this vein is less savage than that of all the other veins, because there it has no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the flea-biting of the little finger of the right hand is conducive to the ailments of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the flea-biting is that you tighten the hand with a bandage or with your own hand, after you have put it in hot water, until the vein is inflamed and is demonstrated to the sight; and then bite transversely; and if it does not penetrate, at least it will not harm.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And take care that you do not cut your hand with the flebotomy, because you leave it so that the nerves of the bare fingers are exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And immediately put the hand in hot water and let the blood flow in it, because if you do not put it in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you apply oil and salt on the vein, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly you should do in all other veins.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	More often the phlebotomy of the left hand is suitable for illnesses of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy of the arm as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the junction of the vena cephalica in phlebotomy is for illnesses that are on the left side of the body, such as are illnesses of the mother, and retention of menses, and for illnesses of the kidneys and ulcers of the thighs and legs, and for their similar illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of the arm is that the patient should put their leg in hot water and make friction on the area where the veins appear; and tie above the joint of the foot with a ligature; and the place of the vein show the thumb aside, and from that it branches out to the surface of the foot, many roots.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Then apply a wide poultice on the leg or thigh of the patient, from the knee to the ankle, with an aggregation of it, which is better and healthier.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you apply a poultice on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath the surface of the foot, and pause your poultice application with which you apply through the passage, as if you wanted to make an incision.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the poultices be visible.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow into a container until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the poultice applicator makes a mistake in the first application, then apply it again with a little of the poultice, because the place is healthy; and do not fear the patient's malice, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do the same with the siphon of the other foot likewise.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is from the knee down to the calf of the left thigh of the patient.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the junction of the poultice application on them is a pain in the hip when it is for blood cauterization.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that it enters in a bath, and tightens and strengthens the thigh of the patient from the side of the wide intestine under the sole of the foot with four fingers on one subtle long bandage, which does not appear except for that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, you perform the fleubotomy in that following each engine that is possible for you and according to the traverse, and it is better; or incise that by incision or cut that by section, because the place of the patient is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many homes a known remedy; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then perform the fleubotomy on some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the said auricular and anular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and make flow from the blood the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the tension and stop on the place of the fleubotomy, cut and strengthen the area, because gentle handling is healthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventouses are of horns, or of brass, or of glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is made according to two manners: one of them is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this purging which is its scarification is according to two manners, for it is done with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the purgings that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are 14 locations on the body, of which one is where purgings are placed on the nape of the neck; and the middle location is in the two parts of the throat together; and purgings behind the jawbone below the mouth; and purgings of the two spatulas; and purgings of the shoulder, and it is above the end of the arm; and purgings of the two axils, and they are of the two arms; and purgings of the two hams; and purgings of the two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And purging does not extract the blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not have virtue through them, just like it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that purging be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess until the body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity provokes purging for illness or for flow, we administer it at every hour from the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This condition causes pain in men due to an accumulation of blood inside them, which leads to severe flatulence and a bloated stomach; and from this they experience nausea and vomiting, as well as discomfort in their head and neck. It also causes a sensation of fullness and darkness in the face and forehead, leading to a dulling of the senses. Additionally, it affects the location of the stomach, causing an increase in flatulence. Furthermore, there is an unpleasant taste of blood in the mouth, which causes vomiting, and an excessive desire to sleep, accompanied by painful and disturbing dreams.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when any of these causes occur, especially if it is during the third or middle of the month, then they command that a purging should be done after having passed two or three hours of the day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is said that purging of the neck is what helps to alleviate heaviness in the head and that which is settled in the senses; but it is better if this is accompanied by evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this purging is at the location of phlebotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not advisable to use on him that which is of cold complexion, or in which there is a catarrh, because it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not suitable to use those old things on the heads of those who have cold-related illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More so to the one on whom it is continuously applied, forgetfulness is caused; and for this reason, it is suitable that you command the one who applies the treatment to put his hand with a bit of warmth on the areas of the feet, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Greater effectiveness of alkahel is in place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilic vein: and for this reason, it is suitable for asthma, and for the constriction of the spleen and the division of the turmoil of the spleen, and for coughs, and for flatulence.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is suitable that the alkahel ointment be applied in a small amount, because if it is placed on the feet, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the application of alhagdahan is suitable for accidental pains in the head and for ophthalmia, and for migraine, and for foresight, and for pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And command the assistant to not press their hand with a scalpel so that the artery does not get cut and acidic flows of blood do not occur.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And evacuation of the mucus that is collected in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and resemblance to the appearance of illnesses that are in the mouth, and instead of a phlebotomy on the upper lip that is between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	More evacuation that is done on the two spatulas collected with a cupping glass, which is made by replenishment of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the evacuation of the two divisions of the blood collected from the beginnings of the tubes, made close to phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilic, median and cephalic, because that attracts the blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins so that the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the assistant to not proceed too far with the scalpel, because the area is devoid of flesh, and beware of the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is an evacuation on which evacuation is done to the bones and collected from the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, and beware.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And command the enema-giver to make a large enema, and let it be of warm water, for the location indicated by strong compression; and strongly let the subtle channels of the enema be opened with a scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Greater enemas of the thighs relieve by evident evacuation, for they extract the blood from the whole body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provoke the menses, and alleviate bothor and edema; and are in place of phlebotomy of two sophas, and of aloes, and of two cavities.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Inflame the belly that makes all the body swell and causes syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the enemas by aloes, the juice is given to the juice through the enemas of two thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the application of the enemas is that you should apply the enema at the beginning with a warm and tempered succion, and do not prolong the application of the enemas, but rather lift them gently, and remove them immediately, and so that the humors come to the location through gentle arrival.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the location already reddened, swollen, and inflamed, and that the appearance of the blood shows.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scratch and go up the discharge little by little, and then consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has tender flesh on his thighs, beware that you scratch him only once and do not repeat it, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And order the bloodletter to amplify the scratching and cut a little deeper, and apply the discharge with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then beware that you scratch two times, for in the first scratching the path of subtlety to the blood and its thinness is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More so in the second one, to the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then let a scratching be done on the third time so that it cleans the dregs.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And gently, when we want to extract a little blood, one scratching is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we scratch a lot; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that we scratch with a deep scratching.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the limit of scratching is where the depth of the vein is only so much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the patient's codena is thick, hard, and dark, and their pores are very constricted, it is necessary that the areas of the ventoses be anointed with lenitive, resolutive, and aperative remedies; if it is summer, then use oil of aloes, or oil of violet, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of cypress; and if it is winter, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of iris, or oil of chamomile, or of sage, and apply these to the affected areas.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick and raw, then the oil should be of marjoram, or of balm, or of aloes, or of anise, and apply it to the affected areas.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	More so if the ventosed area is of tender and delicate flesh, then it is necessary that it be prohibited from oil, and it is necessary that the areas of the ventoses be washed with warm water or warm water of salt, or water of cypress, or water of border sage, and apply these to the affected areas.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for one whose wound is of much humidity, wash their ventoses with sharp vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumach, and apply these to the affected areas.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And from that of which the superfluities are gross, wash the vents with old wine, or with water of senna, which is greater, or with decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to their likeness.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is advisable that the ventilation be protected from in front of the bath; it is also advisable that it be administered immediately after the bath for an hour or for two, and it is advisable that they sleep afterwards with the ventilation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that ought to regulate the bloodletting before the ventilation treatment.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is advisable that you consider the beginning: then if the one who is to be bled or the one who must be bloodletted is choleric and has hot and inflamed blood, then it is advisable that they take cooling causes, such as mild vinegar, endives, bitter oil, and latigas, and julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them to eat delicate foods such as poultry, and lean game meats, and cooked dishes with verjuice, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And from that of which the complexion is cold, it is advisable to take in drink almond syrup, or syrup of dried julep seeds, and sumach, and with sweet-smelling aromas mixed between wine and nutmeg; and that they be advised to use little drinking and eating, and give them foods such as game birds and hemp seeds and pistachios and small game meats.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is known that on the day of venesection and phlebotomy the bleeding should be greater than the drinking.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is known that there should be given to drink in certain hours to certain men tyriac alpharac, or medication of musk, which is musked, or alcelita before the venesection or before phlebotomy or after, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is refined; and it is not known that they should take that scaldfit.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The best venesections that are made by scarification are those that are applied on the liver, and on the middle and gout, and on the navel, in the areas of the joints, and the pit of the arm, because these members do not suffer from scarification on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but attraction of blood from a member, thus as they apply venesection on the breast in disease of flux of blood of the nose; and they use that to dissolve cold and viscous venosity of the member, thus as they apply on the belly and the navel; because that rarifies the member and calms it and reduces the pain when they resolve the venosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied on the joints when there is opacity or porosity, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out the opacity and eradicates the porosity from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	It seems similarly when it is placed on the liver and the middle that gives ventosity in those enclosures.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventoses are administered with juice only; and some of them are given to be cooked at the fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some of them are administered full of warm water in the ailments of the middle.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the ventouse should be filled and made larger, it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs are cut.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of a ventouse administered at the fire: let the width of the orifice be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the pouch be the size of a palm; and let it be on the side of it, in the place that is in its circuit, the size of it, the hole be small according to the quantity that an needle enters into it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of ram ( possibly a plant or herb) or citrus, with thick margins, wool, nails and treads so that it does not let the member move from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let there be in the middle of it a transverse rod of ram or iron, where a candle is placed at the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already this ventouse should be larger than the one we have recommended; and the smaller part of it according to the ailments and the age of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the flatulence of the elderly and thin people is different from the flatulence of the young and those with large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of treating this flatulence with fire on the member is that it extends the stick with fire of flax decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place that on the middle of the transverse rod in the middle location of the flatulence, so that the fire is kindled around the affected part to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then apply it on the member of the patient, and let it be on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we have the flatulence and do not indicate that it should be stopped and the vapor rises through that hole, then the flatulence will be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And apply the stick according to its manner, and repeat it if it is indicated for that condition.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in the case of a flatulence that is administered for the illness of bloating, with water, in which there is no transverse rod or hole, and it is not applied except that it should be filled with water, and it is placed on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this flatulence, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in many members except in the members where it is not possible to apply cups, due to their smallness, such as the foot and gum and their relatives; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the said nose and its relatives.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found to be bloodletting in the veins of clean and purified blood.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let the day and night be bathed in warm water until they are hungry, and let no cause remain in their belly; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and with cups; and let the member of the patient be rubbed until it becomes red; and let cushions be placed upon them.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and fallen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck from the place with a cup, it is even more desirable in treatment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with sour wine and apply warm water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood is prolonged by the application of bloodletting, and it is excessive, then take a cloth dipped in cold water, and apply it above until the flow is stopped.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the blood is multiplied, then pulverize the vitriol trissat, or galbanum and similar things according to the stiptic causes, until the blood is abscessed; or place poultices of roasted fava seeds on the area, and let them stay until the seeds adhere to the location, and the blood is abscessed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And then, if necessary, an iteration of bloodlettings, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodlettings are prohibited from suspension, then rub the area with recent blood or stick a needle in the areas until blood comes out; and then poultices will be placed, for those when they feel some blood come out as soon as they touch.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall, pulverize over those a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or ash, and apply as needed.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the project of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is of many seen necessities in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, be aware that foolish doctors and the common people mock this chapter, and those who for a long time have not respected the books of the Ancients nor have read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is made that this manner of the sciences in our land is private; and you do not forget it in any given time to be completely; and one does not habituate that which is pressed, except for length of reading of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, until one extracts the science from those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have abbreviated it for you and others, and delivered it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed in it many forms of treatments that are administered to it, as is done by addition of declaration, just as it is done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the essence of fractures of bones, from which a necessary premise is, before we begin the remembrance of fractured members and various ones.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning is forbidden to the artisans and a station on the truth of those; so it is you and those who are prompt that they may know or learn this noble art, other than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus I say that when there occurs a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fall, then it is advisable to begin with phlebotomy or to prepare for it immediately, or all at once, if no cause prohibits it, such as lack of virtue, or if it is someone to whom it is unsuitable, or old age in decrepitude, or a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and meat of birds and crab; and prohibit coarse meats and filling up on food and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of an apostemal cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of material to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to their primary regimen, in which their custom is accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And thus when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is advisable that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of moist and gross and heavy nourishment, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from whey and curd and water, and rice, and cabbage, and fish, and cow stomachs, and hocks, and fresh peas, and coarse and similar things to these, and with this regimen is made coagulation of fracture and pus and lighter mucus.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And it is known that the broken bones, when they are in the men who are in the first vigor and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of the limbs of theirs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature for a long time by the desiccation of those members, and they are continued and consolidated those that are of theirs at the end of childhood, just like the bones of small children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But the superior nature adjusts and joins above the broken bone of any part a similar cause to glue in which there is grossness that adheres and strengthens that which is together conglutinated and joined together, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prohibit it from its own works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this cause it is necessary that you apply the plasters of the patient, plasters in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, just as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There is a variety of fracture according to the variety of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And it is known that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other members are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you come with the reminder of the entire species of fracture, explained in the seventh chapter distinctly from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Much diversity of fracture is found in this medicine.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their medicine; for there is made a curved fracture and another that occurs in the stars; and some seen are made fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and astragali and the proceeding and non-proceeding processes, thus as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and there is fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each species there is a proper engine or torment in restoration of the thing, according to what will come as a reminder of it distinctly in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Great signal of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is recognized fracture of the bone: it is crookedness of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the feeling, and so of it when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And then when there is not apparent crookedness in the place nor is it felt by touching when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is a twisted or small fissure, and it is not suitable to put your hand on it and compression of everything; put a pause on the subject of the medicines of which you have remembrance, and it is appropriate for that moment to be applied strictly to the location.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know the place where it is curved and not divided into two or other things that do not touch the satagy, as the whole part of the comparison is in question, then it is suitable to begin from your hour to rectify the twisted thing that has an aposteme, a cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it has an aposteme of caution, then leave it for several days until the aposteme stops; and then apply the ointment according to each manipulation that you know of lightness and of art.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that restoration of it and puncturing of it is less serious than the damage in which the satagy occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what will bring back the remembrance of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More so if the damage is in the bone of the satagy, then it is necessary to extend this broken member by two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be such that you hold the limb in its natural shape, while the extended parts of the limb are stretched, then you will perforate so as to return those additions to their place and according to each maneuver that you can put them in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware, according to your strength, that you do not fall on the patient during the operation, nor cause harm; and proceed according to your own power so that you apply one bone to the other as their companion, according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is advisable that at that time you touch with your hand the one in need, and if sometimes there is a different cause, correct it and adjust it according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, as foolish doctors often do, who cause abscesses or tumors to form through their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, just as we have seen happen through the operations of their foolish practices.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connect, then equate and operate decently and with strictness on that limb, and give it rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make them understand that they should not move that limb during the hours of their vigils and their sleep, and watch for its revolution and agitation, and divert their evacuation, and divert all their movements according to all their virtue; and wait until the position of the limb is a position in which the pain is assured, which is the cause why when it feels in the disposition of the position of the patient's limb or injury; then it is advisable that you change it to another disposition of that in which it does not feel pain; and beware that the position of that limb is direct and equal, so that when it is restored, the limb does not incur crookedness.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil member is that which is recommended; for you should know that the constricted members are diversified in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the elbow, it seems that the wrapping should be of very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are thick, such as the thigh or the leg, it is suitable that the wrapping be tight and strong, for a tight binding connects the large member and strengthens it entirely with constriction, so that no bruise enters into it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, then make your evacuation of the urine, apply a convenient plaster to that, on the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to what the member deserves; and strengthen your hand a little with the plaster.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to the most superior part of the location of the fracture, and hold yourself so that you do not touch your constriction at the place where you have strengthened the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend yourself to the wrapping of the location of the fracture a little, and loosen the constriction bit by bit, until you take from the place a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap the other wounded area around the location of the wound with wrapping, and place your hands on the wrappings at the site of the fracture; and let your operation be in the tightening of the wrapping and in softening of that which we have said in the primary wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then insert a cloth or cloth pad between the wrappings of the plaster to which the distortion of the fracture should be adjusted, if there is distortion; and if not, do not put anything on it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then put a pad on the other bandage, and adjust it over these wrappings decently made as needed, if in the location there is no inflammation or cautious aposteme, then put it on the thing that causes the aposteme or that brings the inflammation; leave that for some days; and then strengthen your hold on the wrappings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the wrappings of the splint be made from reed cane, well-shaped; or from wood of pine; or from palm branches; and let the width of each wrapping be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But it is necessary that the splint which is placed on the fracture be a bit thicker and wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to how it suits the member in size and smallness; and strengthen over the splints with another bandage according to your primary tightening; and loosen above with a thread decently as we have said regarding tightening, and it should be your tightening according to the location of the fracture itself, and the more it is distanced from the fracture, the less tight the wrapping.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and be made of soft material; and if the threads are too thick, as has been seen through the operation of certain foolish surgeons who tighten the threads of the tort, it is a great error, when the tightness exceeds equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And likewise, very fine threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve with tightness what you want, and it is not necessary that between this and that there be a space of one finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is treated at the extremities of the stelas, tighten the binding in those places, then place stoppers made of wool or lanolin so that it does not cause them harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Certain injuries of the fracture are with a wound, and accidents occur in the kernel, and I will come back to the memory in that one in the chapter according to singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that every broken limb is not put in splints on the first day; the reason for which is that the limb, when it is large, does not require that you place it on splints immediately but rather after some days or seven or more, according to the security of the arrival of the apostemous abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plasterers by which the Ancients restored them, which they placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manipulation of plaster as a restoration of fracture, suitable for multiple complications and especially for women and children, because it is about this that neither heat nor cold comes: and it is that you take powder of mullein, and it is the marrow of the flour that you remove the movement of the mill from the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And shape that dough as it is, but rather sift it with a sieve of wool, and pause the preparation of the non-sticky or subtle substance; then use that one.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another manipulation of plaster for restoring fracture and dislocation and sprain: recipe of asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is extracted from wild mint salvage, all one drachm; of mirrh and wormwood one drachm; of garlic one drachm twenty; all things are crushed and sifted and mixed with water or wool if the preparation of the patient is appropriate; then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones gently, and confirms many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another manipulation of plaster which you shape for fracture and sprain: recipe myrrh and half a drachm of white altaea; of myrrh and wormwood one and a half drachms; of acacia six drachms; of Armenian boll twenty.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All things that are crushed in a mortar with crushed motion, and are sifted, and are mixed with water or with white of egg, should be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manual of plaster to apply to joints and separated bones from their places, and accidental pain in those and in fissures and fractures: take a linen cloth and submerge it in warm oil and vinegar, and place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this plaster is not the virtue of restoration, but of caustic abscess and expelling pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another manual of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush all and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manual of quick plaster administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of remaining abscess: take roots of lavender, chamomile and flowers of violets, flour of peas, of all one part; all are crushed and mixed with wine, if the member is not scaled.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scaled, then mix it with water of colic or humid water and use it for that purpose.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another manual of plaster more strong in resolution than the first one, when there is a hard abscess for the restoration of the member: take roots of lavender and seeds of linseed, and balustia, and melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, all one part; all are crushed and mixed with water of sage or sweet water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	According to the esteemed Hippocrates, one should not dissect a corpse that has been placed on the third member of the restoration of the body, unless made of wax and oil, for no other cause; and it is recommended that there be a middle ground between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	In Galen's view, it is seen that they are placed on the broken member regarding the restoration of the body and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat, thus like myrrh, resin, and similars to them of those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Manual of plaster that relieves lesion and pain: take equally, wax, human skin or partridge's brain, and salt, divided into parts; let them be crushed and sieved, and then mixed, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the quantity according to which one must see that the ligament is broken and then dislocated, is that you consider if there is no accident of pain nor swelling nor the bone is fractured, not removed from its place, then you should not untie or loosen the limb.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there occurs at the place vehement pain or swelling or inflammation, then you should constrain or untie it immediately, and apply the plaster to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth and a marine sponge soaked in warm water, and submerge it in tepid water, then wash the area where the swelling is and the pain will be soothed; and place the limb to rest for an hour; and apply a poultice of flaxseed or oil or rose oil on the affected area, covered with a cloth submerged in warm water or oil, and leave it there for nine hours until you are sure of the aposteme's reduction, and the inflammation of the limb is reduced, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply this subtle plaster with a gentle hand and without strong pressure for its primary construction, and subtly work it into the area until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if at times the aposteme and the redness and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have been completely alleviated, and you are in need of a plaster and a bandage, then apply it in this way as you did from the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if none of the causes that we have mentioned happen to the limb, then do not undo it for three days or four or five or seven; and some applications are left on for twenty days according to what appears to you by the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the coagulation of the flesh comes together over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust the strictness more in the second constraint than in the first one, and adjust it according to the swelling of the patient's vein, as the memory of it is recalled.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	Mostly if you have already cleaned and drained the area of the fracture more than it should be covered, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; and so soak that with warm water all day long; and do this for three days; and loosen the strictness a little, and through this operation run to the member the nourishment, and the swelling will be healed.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But that which foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb do, by soaking it when it is not restored at the beginning, as it covers, and it is restored as twisted, is error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were done in this manner, the Ancients would have enlarged their freedom and would have worked with that.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, for which it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by percussion of the spine, and the percussion breaks all the bone inside the siphac, which is called the bone, thus as it is made in the chest, and for this reason this species is named axial; or the spine strikes some part of the bone, and strikes the flesh of it and does not pass the wound to the back of it; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the injury of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is bruised or crushed; and the cause of it is percussion with stone or falling on stone, and likewise its symptoms.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the peritoneum which is beside the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the injury of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture it is that which is bruised in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason is named this type of fracture "hair-like" or "delicate". (Note: a more fitting translation could be "and of fracture it is that which is bruised in the bone, in the thinness of the fine hair, and for this reason is called this species of fracture "cap
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made or by fall or by percussion of stone and to its symptoms, which makes enter some layer of the bone into the divided parts within, and it is made in the concave place thus as accidents to the marrow when accidents happen to their percussion and it is separation of their entry into the divided parts within.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it happens in the bodies of humid bones, thus as with the heads of shoulders. (or "thus like the heads of joints")
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these species of fractures are called "sategias", and they are weighed as if separated pieces. (or "they are like separate fragments")
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will come with a remedy for all that in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we recognize all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of them with probes and evidence of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the species of hair-like [fracture] is recognized by the fact that it appears on the bone, and is scraped off, and cleaned with a probe, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest sign on fear, such as is vomiting from anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and excitement of the veins and redness of those, and similarities to them in the major conditions, it is not healed unless treated.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-threatening accidents, then you wait for healing, then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which thing happens because if the plague has come to you at the beginning as it is plagued and that is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study on the evidence of the tooth on the 14th day according to every disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the summer days, then it is advisable to remove the bone from the teeth on the seventh day, knowing that what is left of the bone is corrupted by the panicle, and that accidents happen which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the panicle covering the brain, and is with broken and torn parts, then it is advisable to sew the torn and damaged part, as I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover the bone according to custom and method as possible according to the shape of the wound, and that it be easier for the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to need the detection of the bone, or flows of blood or a cautious aposteme, then you oppose yourself to what is advisable, and that you fill the place with warm poultices and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the aposteme is settled, and be safe from flows of blood; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And that this be according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you cut the bone with a cutter of straight edge, and this is its shape: Then administer another cutter, a bit wider than that one; and this is its shape:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer to the incision site a poultice that is the size of.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And that there are various incisions named by you, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are at the extremities of the body, and are made of iron or felt.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incision so that it does not bother the head and heal that one.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you perforate around it, where you administer the incisions with the trephines, which are called non-deep trephines.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus but because those do not touch the term of the bone of the skull to that which is near it, for which reason the trephine has a round extremity or edge over that which is put the head of the instrument resembling an edge or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a large number of these trephines, of which each one suits the thickness of each bone, while being present in every skull of the brain, the extremity of which is sharp, and the length and width are according to the quantity of thickness of this skull.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of probes: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the probe on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone is penetrated; then return the probe to another location, and pause there where the entire thickness of the radius or surrounding area is.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the lancets into the lanceted areas that are between each hole of the bone, and make a subtle pus on it with the tip of levity, as we have said, until you penetrate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause due to certain instruments which will prepare for that, like tweezers and subtle forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And take care that you guard with all caution that the lancet does not touch any part of the spleen.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus when you circulate the bone perforating, and it is separated from the spleen if it continues with it, and you extract that, take care to rasp and equalize it in the roughness of its surface that is on the bone with another instrument similar to a lancet, but take care that it is sharper and more subtle than the other lancets.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small bones remains and is rough, then take it with ease where you need to use the instruments; and then heal the wound with ointments and unguents which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other hand of the operator is more relaxed, lacking in fear, which Galen and Avicenna describe with great eloquence; and this is their sermon: it is necessary for you at the beginning to start discovering the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most violent and most apparent, until when you have discovered that part and you have placed your hand on the extremity of this incision, gentle and joyful, which is the form of this:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular part is the knee and does not cut any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides before in length, thus as veins; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the hip on the face of the acute incision on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incision of a part with a small hammer until you have cut all the bone with ease, as it is revolving, and be sure of the peritoneum that does not happen to it in the accident that you fear in any handling, and if the medic was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When a cause is broken in the bone of the peritoneum in any location of bone, the incision of that one with the extremity of the incision, that lenticular one, will cut it with ease, because it is delivered from its pain and its fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and that which is separated or stopped by the bone is the surface of it, and remains in its roughness and subtle scratches, then it is necessary to scrape away that roughness and subtle scratches with subtle scrapers, for which you have prepared the name, in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in every location the most convenient of them and the most suitable for them according to that in which you have performed your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And then administer in your scraper the one with which you scrape the bone at the beginning the widest of those scrapers, and then use then the thinnest of them, and do not stop doing that continually until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	More so in each of the other small fractures and delicate breakages, then administer care according to that which you have lost for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is a cause that is not diminished among all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this is based on what we have written and shown regarding large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the periosteum is torn when you scrape the bone, then take a cloth of linen according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and apply it to the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and rose oil and apply it over the first cloth and do the most gentle pressure that you can on it, so as not to harm the cyst; and then administer on it a broad plaster, and do not bind it except for the quantity that the wound has, just so much.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that one in this treatment for a day or two until you are secure from an aposteme of caution; and then untie it and administer medicine to it with which superfluous dryness is relieved, such as linseed and flour of vetches, and powder of cypress and aristologia, and resembling those things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make from these medicines a powder that is powdered over the wound, such as they are dried; and universally, administer to it all medicine of property by which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your care is clean; and not be in the excess of ointment or other; nor do you let virulence accumulate in it; for when it is adjusted over the panicle of the brain, it corrupts it and pours out, and falls upon the patient with a malignant malignancy.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it falls on the siphac of the head, as from it is clarified the bone and especially when the care of it is despised, and it is blackened on the surface of it; and then consider that if it falls to the patient the accidents that we have said, you should know that it is very dangerous to neglect.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it doesn't come from black bile but rather from the paused medicine, and it is due to the virtue of that medicine that the black bile is made, then take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and apply those to a cloth, and place that cloth on the navel; and treat it with the species of curative treatment that are suitable for it to be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not broken in two parts together with the bones above, or one of those having some cartilage, because there are two bones in it, and the part on the outside is cartilaginous, and it does not break but rather becomes bruised and twisted and dislocated.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should introduce the small finger into the nostril, and bind that fracture inside with the tied bandage, and outside with the bandage in front, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And let this be done by you with ease, and beware that you do not cause harm to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the break is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then you should cut at the extremity of the thread on which the dressing is applied.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the likeness of that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then apply the vinegar or ten of them to the rest of the abscess's cauterization.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the extremity of the nose a thread of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one piece, or put two small tubes, if the fracture is in two pieces, and let it be in the tube the thickness of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers said that the tubes should be wrapped in leather, and should be changed every day, but it is not seen by me; however I have seen that the thread should be wrapped in a plaster made with powdered mummy; and then lay the tube so that the bone is held firm and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And some wadded things are inserted into the nose, in place of a tube, that is to say a cotton plug wrapped in linen cloth; and it should be that you have the fracture of the nose with vehement movement and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do tubes.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there's an accidental wound with a postulated abscess, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or a cloth soaked in warm oil and rosewater, or on the opposite side.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if it doesn't develop into an abscessed wound, then it is advisable to plaster the aforementioned area with flour of chickpeas and powder of dried roses mixed with egg whites; and apply this on the ulcer, and do not put anything on the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the nasal bones are fractured with a small break or are comminuted, then it is advisable to cut into those, and extract those with an instrument suitable for that purpose; and sew the gash, and cure it with something that nourishes and consolidates, and apply plasters suited to that.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there's an accidental wound inside the nose, then it is advisable to cure that with warm poultices and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the break is not with a wound, consider then if the fracture is only superficial, and not broken into two pieces, and curved to the inner partitions, then its treatment is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And then, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and likewise if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and press with that finger the curvature of the fracture gently to facilitate the separation of the parts, with one hand on the outer part of the jaw and the other hand on the inner part of the fractured bone; and decently move that one.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you administer extension to both parts according to rectitude so that their alignment becomes possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a conjunction of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those with which you expect to remain with thread of gold or silver or silk; and place a bandage over the broken jaw, and a doubled cloth over it, and a large stellar bandage decently made, or a single bandage along the length of the jaw; and bind that above according to what seems suitable for the binding and what is convenient for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and calmness, and place his diet of soothing foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the shape has already been altered in some way, then take care to dissolve it on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered in them and apply a plaster made with powder of mola, or white of egg, or flour of cypress, since you will have applied the cerate of them, and place the woolen cloth over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then put and adjust that plaster on them, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, so that it does not come undone until it is healed and strengthened the fracture; for many times observed this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another observed abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of them until it is healed, and the abscess be reduced.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or splinters, then you should subtly remove those splinters with what is convenient for the remedy of those injuries.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with a fleobotomy according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those splinters, and not all of them can be removed, then you should close the orifice of the wound if it is wide; and if not, place on it one of the plasters that is convenient for it and that adheres to it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the hernia when it is strained.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the intestine is torn from the part in front of the navel, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is torn, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch the intestines; and it is easier to restore; or it is such that it touches the intestines, and it is difficult to restore; or it is such that the fracture is with a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is with a wound, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the intestine and follows the torn hernia, and the other stretches out the skin over the affected area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then bind the fracture with threads or ties so that it is given the shape of the intestine as it should be, and there is neither protrusion nor concavity in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place a piece of cloth or wool under the patient's thigh, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need; and stretch and elevate the hernia and tie the cloth around your hand so that you bind the fracture as it should be.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot bring the extremity of the furcula to the parts in front, because it has penetrated too far, then it is necessary that the patient be placed upside down on their neck, and a cushion be placed on the middle muscle of their thigh in large size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of their thigh to the parts inside until the bone of the furcula is elevated that is in the groin in its own, and then you correct the fracture and bind it with ties on the toes.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	More often if you feel stagnations of the furcula and they are inflamed, then it is necessary that you make an incision above that and extract those stagnations to facilitate.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision with one of the incision tools that you have prepared for this, after you have placed under the furcula the instrument that serves the ciphac; and the instrument is made of wood or iron, of which this is the form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and let its width be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that it have two extremities thus as occasions, and one extremity be broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound, which you have made when you extracted the sagittal bone is large, and there is a risk of apostema, then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear apostema, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the cleft in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if apostema occurs, then put a dressing with sharp vinegar and rose oil on it, and apply it to the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	More than the constriction of the bone when it is a wound and its section, is that you put a plaster made from flour of mulberry with white of egg, and apply it to the swollen part, and then apply the spatula of the patient's hand, if indicated for that, and then take a bandage, so that the one that has the fracture, which should be long, and its width is about a palm; and then apply powders duplicated on the swollen part and the plaster; and then take a thin stick of wood whose width is three fingers and similar length; and then wrap that in a dressing, and then wrap that dressing with the stick in the place on the place of the fracture; and then apply bandage thus as it is rolled, and roll that around the neck of the patient's hand and the patient's arm, and the patient's thigh, and reduce that to all parts, and whenever the constriction of the fracture with descent constriction, and this is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And thus, that the splint is not removed from the broken bone; and for this reason that you see the patient every day, when the bandage is softened or the splint is seen to be in a bad position, then you correct it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then stop the patient's sleeping with their neck, and place their pillow under their sleep at night a small cushion; so that when they are elevated by their assistant on that side, then the fracture of the leg is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or their arm is tied to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not untie the bandage unless there is an accident in the area of the abscess or apostem, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the condition of it to that effect, and adjust the tightness and restore it, and let it be until it is restored and the fracture of the leg is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some observations in some men it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is thrust into the patient's side and does not cut the flesh but only the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And then when the location of the patient is cut — and it is cut in the middle location of the patient — and it is not recognized except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare and reduce it according to its natural shape in every manner possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then apply a poultice made of ground alum and vinegar to the location; and apply a dusting of doubled cloth; and apply to it a subtle plaster of table or board, according to the quantity of the entire spatula or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the plaster forms a hollow in some of the locations of the spatula, then fill that hollow with vinegar and alum, and apply the plaster equally.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And strengthen it with a long bandage from constraint, and with the firmness of the plaster, so that it is not removed from its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the dressing every day; and all visits that it is softened, replace another visit and strengthen it and reset the plaster if it is removed from its location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And lay the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when this period is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and be assured that the dissolution of this is not harmful to the bones for which the beginning is not tender nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the place of the fractured bone and you put a bandage on it, then you sew over it, and remove it, and do as we have said in the case of the fracture of the wrist, of swelling, of abscess, or cautery, if it happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, when it is broken in the middle area of it, and this causes pain; but the extremities of it are not moved, except those that are broken and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of it, when the middle of it is fractured, it is that it declines to the inner parts and happens to it great pain, and difficulty in walking, and coughing, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity where the bone is fractured and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be lifted onto their back, and a cushion placed between their shoulders; and press on the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two assistants, and proceed subtly in the operation of it and in the adjustment according to all manner that is most possible and that suits it, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then pause over the plaster and stop and pause on top of the subtle table of salt or of warm poultice and of their similar lightness, since you envelop that in a cloth; and then subtly apply it to the broken bone so that it is not dislocated; and go with a bandage according to the condition of the back some tightened places, and tighten that one with a strict bandage; and then consider the bandage every hour, and when it is loosened, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to provoke the dissolution of that which needs corrosion or purging, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then touch and divide that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what occurs through that with the art of curing; and then return the plaster, if at times adapted to the face; and adjust to it a strictness until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	It is known that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in coarse locations which are on the back; and of their extremities, from the partition beforehand, nothing occurs to those contrary injuries except through what are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The recognition of the patient is not diminished by the sentiment of their inquiry with them.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it joins the fracture with the fingers according to the possible method, until it is joined as it should be, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if necessary for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined towards the internal divisions, then it causes the patient vehement pain and puncture, similar to the puncture that occurs in one who has pneumonia, and because of this the bone puts forth the wrapping; and it causes difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of bloody mucus; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the medicines are prepared for that with many preparations.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them it is said: it is good to give the patient foods that cause inflammation and swelling, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We would have avoided this because it should not be a light cause to generate a surgical abscess, if it doesn't happen; and if it does happen, then it already helps with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said some of them that it should be administered with a poultice and then sucked with force; and it seems reasonable, but however it is feared that the poultice will attract the excesses to the place due to the debilitation.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They said some of them: that the place should be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and that powders should be applied between the ribs until it is filled, which should be the binding plaster when you envelop that affected part; and that the patient should be treated with a cure of pleurisy and of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the cause violently constricts the patient who does not suffer, and the bone punctures the vein with a sharp pointed instrument, put above the patient, then it is necessary that we make an incision on the place, uncover from the broken rib, and put above that instrument which conserves the diaphragm, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that we introduce the bone with facility, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if there occurs an aposteme (abscess), then cut it and push powders into hot rose oil and apply on the place, and that the patient should be treated with what is suitable for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be breathed upon the side on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter nine.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some times it happens that the fracture affects the neck bones, and similarly their cartilage, and likewise the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider this: for if the muscles are already softened and numbed and deadened and cannot be moved or stretched or strengthened, and when you constrict them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, there is no feeling of pain, then you should know that it is incurable, and in such conditions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you touch them and feel constriction in the fingers and puncture, then you should know that the knot of the bone is saved and that the disease will be cured with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if it happens to the vertebrae of the neck similarly and you want to know if it will be cured or not, then consider the weight of the person.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that it is already softened, the same thing happens to them that happened to the others, and also when they lie on their back, they have bloating and evacuation against their will, and sometimes it is retained above their back and they want to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is mortal, and therefore do not bother with their cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	More often if no accident occurs from those things, the cause is better and the injury is lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of it is that you perforate with a needle to the seat of the postulant abscess, which you place on the inflamed spine or on the mangled and rubbed sole, or in the hollows of the shoulders; place it on that thing for several times a day until the abscess is seated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place one of the comforting and exciting plasters, and stretch it over that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side where they feel pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the bone is dislocated or any cause that has already been separated from it, then you must cut on the tendon and show that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then cure it with a plaster for the unctions of the ulcers, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	More often if the skin of the bone is cracked, and it is the end of the wound, then you must put your right thumb in the patient's bottom, and join the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible for a second adjustment; and then place on it a plaster and bandage, if needed, and then bind that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel shattered nerves in it, then apply a poultice on that, and remove that, and cure the wound with the treatment that is preceded by the fact that it will be healed.
Capitol .x.	E si sentes satagias trencadas
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of restoration of the narrow passage or Of the restoration of the strait/ channel
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the narrow passages are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is not but a communication in the extremities of those and are cut in length and decline to the parts inside; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is numb when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is over the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you splint it according to what is appropriate for equalization until it is assembled into its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the hip or what already declines to the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on their belly so that it is prepared for you to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have splinted it, put a plaster on it, and apply a bandage of cloth or of cotton, and bind tightly so that there is no danger of fracture puncture nor movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Engage the cavity with what fills that space so that it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their side or over their left side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If there is an aposteme abscess, then you stop the extension of it and its restoration until the aposteme abscess is sedated, and place on it what will seat according to what has been said previously; and then return to its restoration, and strengthen that area with a bandage.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the seventh bones or they are broken, then pull them out.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter eleven.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the assistant or helper, (but more likely) Of the restoration of the fractured joint.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutori is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, (more likely it refers to a joint in the upper limb) or (possibly) The adjutori is that which is the
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a wooden splint according to this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be two ligaments in the two extremities, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient sit on a chair; and then put outside the broken arm on the splint until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place where the curvature of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then raise the limb affected by the severe cause, or let the minister extend it to the parts of the patient's body; and then the doctor should place his hands together with the patient's hands, until the fracture returns to its proper place.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient should be lifted onto their shoulder and raise the hand of the neck with a bandage; and then order two servants to hold, one of them holding what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holding the patient's pus; and each of them extend to their respective part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie above the fracture with a bandage and also below it with another bandage, and each of the two servants will extend to their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And thus if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, it is proper that half of the bandage be placed on the cilium and the other part be placed around the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, it is proper that the bandage be placed on that spot and also above the elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Wrap that with a dressing and bandage, and then as soon as it is wrapped as is proper and applied with good application, then tie it if there is no danger of causing an abscess or caution.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	More often if there's an urgent need for a cauterized abscess, then apply the strictness within the seventh day, and let it rest on the woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil mixed with rosewater until the abscess bursts, and then you will be strong to extract it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of extracting it is that you apply a plaster on the fracture, and then put a dressing of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that splint, and place your hand opened over the shoulder muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And secure the cloth and tighten it on the splint of the arm so that the arm is in its place, if not prohibited by some cause from the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use a stick.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place on the fracture that stick which is thickest and strongest of the other sticks; and put between each stick the width of a finger, and let the length of the sticks be according to the break with an addition of three fingers from the entire fractured part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten on the sticks with the strictness that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your tightness on the place of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more aligned, the tightness should be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you observe the positioning of the stars and the strictness as we have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its proper position, then you do.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear a hot abscess, then loosen the strictness and the stars within the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no accident occurs in the place of bruising or inflammation; or it is prohibited for food to reach the member due to an excess of strictness; and thus rectify all that according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of that will occur, then do not loosen the ligature unless after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And apply to the assistant a poultice full of warm wool, and consider at all hours of night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed nor dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, thus rectify all this with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food in the order that we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is strengthened; and then cover with a cloth that grosses the food of it.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the assistant and the patient's leg to be strengthened in a few days; then it is necessary that they be unlocked and a bath be administered and medicine applied with an ointment that corrects the condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is a pulled one, then you should not unlock it for two days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter twelve.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of arm fractures.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forks; of which one is small, and it is the one that is commonly called the elbow, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed above the small one, from the upper part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it happens that only the larger fork is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller fork below is broken, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fork of the upper arm is broken, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller fork below, then it is convenient for the doctor to make a small extension with ease so that it can be easily straightened.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	More often the larger intestine is what is torn, then it is necessary that you apply extension with great force.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both intestines are torn together, then it is necessary that you apply the most intense traction with greatest strength.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary that you place the figure of the hand for restoration of it and extension of the stretched-out part on a cushion, and let the palm of the hand be at the divisions above, more than all the other fingers, and the said finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be seated on a low chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion in front of it in its height or depth, so that the patient does not lean forward.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm of the affected part more towards the left hand or to the right, and another minister extends above in a similar manner.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor reduces the bone within so that it returns to the best position that it can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there are fragments, then you must drill to remove all the pieces from their place with your instrument.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears that the fragment is separated and touches the tendon and is not part of your hope in the restoration of it, then you sew over it and leave it according to the method that we have spoken of above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	More often if the fracture is on the plague, you have already done a single chapter, and then take the cure of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if there is an abscessed tumor at the beginning of your restoration, then apply a cloth with wax made from olive oil and white wax, and let it be between speculation and subtlety, and tighten the cloth over it with subtle strictness until the abscess breaks; and then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared from powder of rounded clay and the clarity of dove's dung, and apply bandages; and let the bandage be that which is placed on that fracture, both soft and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the name of the bandages of the arm is seen in the major preparations, or whether the fracture is in one splint or in two splints together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply your tightness over the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when it is more necessary to constrict the parts separated from the fracture or the lower parts of it, apply the constriction a little softer according as the remembrance of it precedes in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and humid, and not harsh or rough, and the thread with which it is tightened should be moderately between subtle and coarse, just as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Examine the limb and the ligament closely for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if a cause arises that requires correction, such as swelling that occurs in the limb, then wrap the limb with hot water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then apply the bandage again.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the fracture is already softened and the bone is already reconnected and resembles its original shape, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more so if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, then wrap it so as to soften it a little and leave it for several days until it heals, and then tighten it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	More so if to the patient no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs, then it is not necessary that it be untied for about twenty days or around that.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And the hand of the patient should be suspended by its virtue of restless movement, and make it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter thirteen.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the thigh and of the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	It is known that to the thigh and to the joints of the fingers a painful fracture occurs, and it does not happen to them but rather an injured wound of visible swellings.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when fracture or injury happens to the thigh, then it is advisable that the patient keep quiet and lay down in bed with both legs equally extended, and place your hand on the thigh over the affected area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And let the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those ends so that they are joined with good junction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is advisable to apply plaster and cotton, unless an apostemic cautery is needed; and place a bandage underneath according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More so if the crack is in the inner parts of the palm of the hand, then make a figure of a sphere from cloth, and command the patient to hold it with their cracked palm; let it be bound with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the bandage of leather be wrapped in cloth in which there is padding, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and tie it as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the forearm, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another splint below the fracture on the palm, so that the hand can be opened and straightened; and then apply a bandage, just as the hand is turned to the forearm between the fingers with a ligament.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs at the knuckle of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be immobilized according to what is necessary and apply a bandage around the palm and if you wish, place a small splint on it so that the fracture can be elevated and not bent.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle one, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be immobilized and tied with a bandage around the finger to which it belongs; or all the fingers can be tied together in a continuous manner, and this is better; or place a small splint on it, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and then apply that, the application of a heated poultice and oppose — in your operation — to what is necessary when any of those causes occur, as it is iterated in the narration of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter fourteen.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone, which is called broken and declared by the sensation that it is turned to the front part above and to the worst below.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the healer extends all the bandage to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	More, if it approaches the root of the thigh, then the bandage is applied to the groin at the part of the perineum, so that the extension comes into place, and the other bandage is below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is near the groin, then the bandage is made near the groin, and the extension is to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor puts the bone in its place with both hands, so that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by a good joint; then one must apply plaster and bandage, if there isn't an accumulation of pus on the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	More often if it happens in the apostema, then you will leave that for several days until the apostema abscess is drained, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The stricture of it should be made thus: take a bandage that wraps around the fracture, and fold it two or three times, and remove the excess from it; and then wrap the leg up to the ankle and to the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert the end of the bandage between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the separated parts, and let the ends of the bandage protrude from the upper part of the two parts, and then wrap around the leg and the thigh what is left over from the excess of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then put a splint on the thigh in the place of that fracture itself, and put one of them a splint on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with warm cloths, so that the stricture is consolidated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start with a strong stricture on the middle of the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as much as you can loosen the bandage at the place of the fracture, the tighter it should be and less stiff and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the thigh to the separated parts of the hips until it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the spine on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the structure on that, given that it should not cause corrosion or abscesses to the member, nor cautery or inflammation and symptoms similar to those; and if any of these causes occur, then immediately treat the dislocation of it, and rectify what occurs, according to what we have said many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More so in the bone is the weight of the bone which presses, then it is necessary that you alleviate that according to what is possible for you; and if not, make a wound on it and remove that, and cure with that which precedes the remembrance until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And many times this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by another thing that is adjusted to its spine, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But however in the restoration of it in such a way made, it should not cause lameness to the patient; and if it is restored alone, another thing that should be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limps with the one that is strongest.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And it is known that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months or a few years, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and of the other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade of the upper tooth.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	It is known that a fracture of the shoulder blade of the upper tooth usually ends badly unless a suitable mixture of herbs is applied.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if there is a fracture, then it is not just a crack or hole in its parts, and this is with an ulcer or six ulcers, and about that the sentiment has been stated.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken from its parts, with the said things, should be aggregated and joined together as much as possible for equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply a plaster and put it on that rounded stick, if you need it for that purpose; and bind them together with a bandage suitable for this.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the conditions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as an aposteme dressing and similar to those injuries which are opposed to any accident with what is convenient for it to be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter sixteen.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	It is known that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and is named for the leg itself; and the other is subtle, and is named fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And the same types of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm also occur in each of the species of leg fractures, and for this reason the restoration of one is similar to the restoration of the other, and the operation for it is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are fractured at the same time, the leg is rendered completely useless.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thinner bone is fractured, the leg is partially disabled.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is fractured, it causes more harm, and is one of those conditions that cannot be alleviated.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension, alignment, and ligature of the splints according to that treatment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But above all, be cautious that if the leg fracture is a bad one with many complications, that the extension should be milder and less tight, and that it alleviates your condition.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you prepare the splints and complete the entire treatment, then you will take pieces of cloth from the same material as the ones that are placed on the soles (soles of the feet), which are made of branches of palm; choose from those the ones to which a small thickness is requested, and not of the rough ones, and let their length be according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the thinnest part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each bandage in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one over the division of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and let them extend from the knee to the base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two splints in three places on both extremities and at the middle place, for with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right and left division, and it stays in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a wooden splint is administered according to the length of the leg; and it is placed on it, on the leg, so that it conserves that movement. 
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	Major improvement will occur if you apply this to a fracture, and when you have applied it, the wound will heal properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the leg and study it for previous studies, and you will guard it from apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of these causes happen, then apply to him what is suitable so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not experience total fracture; but the bones of the foot experience some fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely experience fracture, and it does not happen to them except for bruising due to bad positioning.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient should put his foot on the ground prepared in that way as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then put one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and press those, and squeeze, and push those back into their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster cast and bandage underneath, and put on the belly of the foot a small table with two flat surfaces.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that leg with a straight structure downwards, since you have wrapped it with bandages and other treatments for the aforementioned conditions.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you will find the ligament loosened, for you will find the bones reset, or re-aligned, or re-located, and the operation in those is thus completed.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some of the vertebrae are dislocated, then restore them, and reset them in the same way as you do and teach to yourself in the restoration of the vertebrae of the back.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then put a splint on the dislocated finger according to its length, and let it be bound with a little bandage; and then give the foot this board which is recommended to you, and strengthen that leg with a straight structure downwards.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is dislocated of the bones are two or three or more, then you put a splint on each finger according to its quantity wrapped in lion's bandage, and strengthen the board at the lowest part of the foot, and let it be above one of the ends of the board outside the belly of the foot so that it holds well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is fitting for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which have been told to you in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and apply them to every accident according to what is suitable.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter eighteen.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the knee of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the rod of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the knee of the woman is fractured, then make that plaster cast, and place it inclined to the part of the back a little, and let it be held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And let the midwife put a poultice on the knee of the child, and let it be made on the knee of the woman as on a sphere; and let the woman be bent, and lift the back of the child little by little, until all that is dislocated is reduced so that the part of the knee is in its place as it should be and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And let dusting powders be applied to the back of the child, and when it wants to urinate, help the child with ease and let it urinate, and reduce and return that which is according to the method according to which one treats at the beginning, and then return to the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that, until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a bladder of a sheep and tie on the thigh of the child a cane thread; and insert all the bladder into the knee of the child, and blow into the thread with force until the bladder is inflated inside the knee, so that the fracture returns to its place.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then fill up with cotton or plaster for several days according to what we have recommended, until it becomes healthy.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis in a man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and reduction of the liquid that we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And this liquid is not hidden in these nearby fractures, and few have come to know it, especially for those who have some study and use and understanding of my book; for that fracture means to you in the major preparations, a right way in restoration and in the strictness of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	More in the rod of a man when it is fractured, take a poultice of oil, and put the rod in it; and then place a pause on the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and then let it be left for three days or around that time, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractures of bones when it is caused by a wound.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one to whom a fracture with a wound happens, and especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or of the arm, or similar to that, that you should consider and perform surgery on it as soon as possible, if the conditions for surgery are suitable for you, as we have said before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague causes bloody discharge, then it is necessary that you cover yourself with protection so that you do not breathe in the dust of the patient's feces, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if a hot abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, because you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent and exposed above the skin, then it is necessary that you force reduction of it and push it in with your hands to facilitate and minimize its protrusion.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if protrusion is not to your advantage and the preparation of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers and the width of which is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take from those three or four according to the quantity that is indicated in the treatment of all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be reason, and let there be a small groove in the paw so that it is not doubled over during the compression on that one at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it be of sharp extremity to which there is margin on the six extremities; and let the thickness of it be tending upwards, and of its mass entering into the divided parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is little spade or small blade.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Because it is necessary that the extremity of the sharp one be placed above the extremity of the bone that stands out.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And insert that one in a channel so that the bone returns, and let it be adjusted with some equation or balance.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then make an effort to adjust the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of the broken one is subtle, and does not take the instrument for good reception, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely to what we have recommended, then cut it to what is suitable for it from the incisions that we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And return that which remains in the bone of roughness and of scarce cartilage.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and with the reduction the patient finds violent pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer with the patient for great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When the restoration that you make to the bone is completed, then submerge a black cloth in warm vinegar, and specifically if it is in summer, and do not apply cerate or other causes with oil on the wound, so that it does not induce putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer threads at the time of completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered unless the trauma is so severe that it requires bindings and dressings according to the quantity of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not touch the wound to the fracture, because many times it happens that foolish doctors cause death or rotten illness or infection on their patients, unless they are wise.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling of this one relents, softens, differs from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear those accidents worse than what we have mentioned, and find pain in the place, then do not think to apply threads there, but rather make an application of durable cloths in place of threads and tie it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when you have already applied the plaster one or two times to the wound, which has generated pus in it, then remove the cloth that you had placed over that limb, and apply ointments, which according to our custom are used to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar medicines.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is advisable for you to dissolve the ligament and consider the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that pus can flow from it to the lower parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound takes many days to heal, and is not consolidated nor has the pus been discharged from it, then you should know that there are stagnations of the petechiae for which you must inquire into the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those stagnations, separate and extract those that can be separated, but leave those that cannot be separated and cause the member to become putrid and produce pain, and make an incision into those according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if there occurs to the wound ichor or pus, which is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply one of those remedies that are suitable for it, according to the treatment of which the preceding narration is given in the following chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from this you should understand that my sermon is to be presented with your weight: when the large bone is broken, place it on the member in the same way as the bone of the thigh and of the hip and similar to those of the large members, and do not attempt to pull or extract it for which motive several fatal accidents happen due to this, death; having laid aside that which weighs down, because for forty days or thirty; and then treat the wound if it is visible to you, and if not lay aside that.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter twenty.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many visible accidents happen to this swelling in the vicinity of healing of a fracture, and especially when it is near the joints, and the shape of the member is disfigured by it; and therefore it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer to it those medicines that have been proven to be effective such as aloen, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar ones; so that you take some or all of them, and mix them with vinegar, or with white wine, or with sour wine, and apply them to the swelling in a poultice, and bind them on it with a good bandage.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And release the strict binding that does not untie for many days; and place a plaster on it and another underneath, until the swelling is reduced; or strengthen over it a lamina of lead descent, since lead has the property of reducing all that is inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling is already converted into stone and necessity provokes to remove that tumor, then cut it for the sake of the superior part of the body, and cut out the superfluous and eminent parts, or shave it with a razor soaked in remedies until it is reduced; and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and a plaster is applied to the subtle and fragile member not according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and a plaster is applied to the subtle and fragile member, then this is not done except for many reasons: among which one is the excessive solution of the ligament and the bad joining of it; or for excess strictness of the ligaments so that nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the member; or for an excessive multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not at its hour; or for lack of health in the body of the patient and for weakness of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The cure for this is to give the patient something to make them thinner and to make their heart tender so that the blood will multiply in it; and administer a bath; and apply warmth and joy to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply a plaster on the member, so that the plaster draws out the morbid matter, or continues to suck out the water with a warm poultice, until the nutrition circulates and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibited is the operation of their resetting, or reshaping, of that which is deformed.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the member that has already been restored, then apply the healing of its crookedness and prominence to the broken and knotted bone, and it is for this reason that the shape of the member is spoiled, but however the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, therefore it is not suitable that you should receive the word of someone who insists that the member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But already many foolish doctors and restorers, who have done this in our land, have been shamed; and this operation is very blamable, inducing great fear of the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the lameness and knotting are recent, then it is suitable that they be wrapped in warm water in which have been cooked softening herbs, such as meadowsweet and roots of the same, and melilot, and similar to these; and let a plaster be made with mollifying plaster, like ben's diacalcium; or that a poultice be prepared from root of marsh marigold and be mixed with rosewater or oil of cypress, and be applied to it; or that fatty figs be crushed and applied with woolen cloth, and similar to these of the medicines that are called by the name of consolidating remedies.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases it is dissolved with continuous friction of the hand on the most humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered to the entire affected area at all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the tortuosity has already advanced and is made strong and converted into stone and necessity requires treatment with iron, then it is necessary that the worst part be cut out and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and that which superfluously adheres to the bone with subtle incisions, and assistance should be administered to facilitate the solicited area.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of sermon on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints from their proper place, by which movement is prohibited, and the shape of the limb is distorted, and it brings upon the patient great pains and large sores.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perforate as soon as possible so that it can be reduced, and do not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the area becomes infected and strong with what is made, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is not advisable to massage or stretch during the time of infection, because many times it brings about spasms and severe pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When that happens, then it is necessary that you prepare yourself for the phlebotomy of the patient, and let it be understood that the application should prevent the abscess; and the member should be wrapped with hot water and oil, and the reduction should be facilitated.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And let every member be healed with the water of which the memory will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And already the chapters of dislocation are ordered according to what is proceeded in fracture; from the part of the body that is upper inside to the part that is below.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When the two jaws are dislocated if they don't articulate; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are returned to their places with little manipulation, and slightly mollified; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation and compression, until they are mollified at the joint, so that the saliva of the patient flows and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is slight, then in major preparations it returns by itself for a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	Mainly if the dislocation is entire and complicated, then it is advisable that a reduction of the discomfort be administered, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the assistant holds the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts the said thumb of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands be outside with the ones that hold; and commands the patient to cease moving their jaws and relax those muscles of each part; and the doctor pulls the jaw and forces the jaw until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easier and the reduction of both is not delayed at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they return and are pulled back, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, then apply on those pillows of cloth with wax, and make a mixture of wax and oil to be rubbed; and apply it with ease and soft bindings.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two pillows, so that they do not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew any substance; having their food nearby, let them eat it, until when the pain is relieved and the jaw is massaged, then turn them in the desired position.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered easily, and do not work on the opening of the mouth unless eating and drinking and evacuation are facilitated, until the jaw is massaged and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated at some hour and not converted to their proper place, then apply warm poultices and assiduous fevers and soda, and let the stomach of the patient be evacuated, and let them vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, then know that it is a loss; and many times death will occur to the one to whom this condition happens in X days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the jaw and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The jaw is not dislocated from the tooth that is next to it on the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated to the front part, and this is declared by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient goes on top of two seats and extends the two arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then bind the area with your palm with strong binding, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And apply a poultice on that plaster and dust and sprinkle on that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More, the extremity of that which is the hip joint and continues with it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and adjusted as we have said and as it appears to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice on that plaster, and dust, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this medical treatment the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in one way, but in three manners, of which one is that it is dislocated from the top to the bottom.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated from the underside of the muscle, and this is done with tension; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	It is dislocated and exits to the right of the thighs when the hip is weak, and it is more dislocated in those where the flesh is sparse; on the other hand, it is dislocated less when there are many fleshy parts, it exits with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And the blow strikes some men with percussion or a fall, and the muscle of it is affected by a caustic abscess, and it is treated for that which has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then consider that you squeeze that which is inside where you were certain of it, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is acknowledged when it is on the right and left parts of the hip; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find among them manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and on the hip to the right of the touch of the head of the muscle as if a egg, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor can they do so with any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated from the chest or above, and you then find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of it to the separated parts below; and then pauses with the weighty fingers on the titillic of it, and raises the joint with strength in its own place, and the minister raises the hand of it, and stretches that out in its; and then pauses that with the weight so that it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if through what we have said it does not return, and from the beginning there is dislocation, for many days, then it is good that the patient be bathed in hot water and be given a mixture to drink that softens and loosens, as if one were to mix equal parts of oil, fenugreek, and honey in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and paused with the fingers on the titillic of it in expectation of the lane that is between looseness and strictness, and then the doctor pauses his talon on the sphere, and raises the head of the muscle with virtue, and draws the hand of the patient so that it is not displaced to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not dislocated to the parts below, until it returns to its own place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce it in this manner: it is that you make a man be present who is longer than the patient, and stands on the side of the bed, and inserts his muscle below the titillic of the patient and raises the titillic of it to the separated parts above so that the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below of their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	More often if the patient is lighter, then it is good to have another cause suspended, so that weight relieves, because the dislocation returns immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced easily in another manner: and it is that a stick be fixed on the ground with a round cap, of rounded figure, like a mortar's pestle, which is neither too thick nor too thin, and let the patient be seated on it; then let them sit on the cap of the stick with their legs spread, and the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and let their hand be extended to the divisions of the other part; and let their body be extended from the other strong part, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult by all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick the quantity of which is in length two arms, and the width of it is four fingers, and the thickness of it is alleviated at the tip of the little finger according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then on the round cap let linens or cloths be placed so that the stick does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then let the thigh of the patient be placed, and let their hand or arm be extended over the stick between the divisions, and let the stick be tied on the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Approach the arm and place it on a ladder of steps according to the width, and the hand should be extended to the parts of the hips, and the other thing should be suspended from the other part, so that the joint is held in this way.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is completed according to whichever manner is possible for you, and then you will place on them a little sphere of flax of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of molybdenum or aluminum and wool of horse over all the muscle, thus as it is rolled upward, and then tighten the little band with a decent strictness; and the ligament should be rolled over the plaster, and the hand of it should be attached to the neck of it, and should be elevated, and the hand of it should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is good that the food of the patient should be gentle, until the member is comforted, for it is better for their healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given in greater quantity and exercise some movement; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	More so if the joint is dislocated by excessive moisture that affects it or for another cause, then it is good that a cautery with three probes should be administered to it, as it is previously stated in the chapter on cauteries.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if the joint is thus treated and for seven days the ligament and the joint are not immobilized, and the plaster and the bandage are reduced over certain visible wounds, and it is not tightly bound and cannot elevate that arm to the separated parts, then you will know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are either inflamed or stretched or softened, and you will know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	From the dislocation of that which is made from the foot and the thigh or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let it be administered in the other bandage, and cure it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there occurs to it the slowing down of healing in the member and slowness in its movement, then let the patient use warm baths visible wounds until that slowness is alleviated and it returns to its first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and this is dislocated in all parts, and mainly in the front part more than the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when you examine the patient or touch according to any figure that may be dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip with your hand, it is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with that the upper muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is known that the thighs are connected, and the dislocation should be reduced as soon as possible before it becomes an apostema (abscess), because if it reaches the abscess, reduction is difficult, and far from being cured; especially when it affects the posterior parts, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many times death occurs due to that.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of the patient should be extended with two others, and their arm should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the hip and holding them, and they press the joint with the heels of their hands together, or with the edge of their palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	More often if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns so that the hand doubles over its own hand, until it strikes the hip with the edge of their palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer a vehement extension and very strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same joint with two ministers so that it is not wrenched away during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then wrap the arm from all sides, since it is enveloped in a double layer of cloth over their hand, or a bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with their hand, anoint it with some oil so that it facilitates the causes that help with the lubricity of the joint for ease; and then strongly massage the joint with a violent rubbing until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then reduce the patient's body that is placed on a plaster in which there is stipicity and evacuation with album of urine, and it is extracted with strict decent descent, the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is dissolved; and thus if the joint is formed in its own place, then you dissolve the bandage of theirs and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for several days until it is extracted; and then dissolve that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to them by gravity then the reduction of the joint, and their disposition is in movement, administer humidification in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or apply an aleatory plaster on the joint, which is a fatty cushion; and then tie it, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then apply the paste, and put that in a bath; and when sweating, then rub the joint with tempered friction, and apply it on that alleviating place, so is movement of motive, one time, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in the bath's interior, until it becomes clean.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place on that wound of cow's humid and scratched with butter and strain over that; and make some visits, for that is humid and returns to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, it is about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder dislocation of the hand sometimes is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, and the opposite is for other joints, but especially it is necessary that there be speed in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, before the place becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the servant extends the hand of that one, and the doctor places his hand or the palm on the prominence of the joint, and presses that until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	It seems that the patient's palm has been placed on the stomach of the hand, then the patient should put their back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is before the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that internal member should be on the table, so that the doctor's hand can reach that weakness of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns immediately, that's good; and if not, then strengthen that part with a plaster cast, putting the abscess and letting it heal; and don't repeat this, because if you do, you won't be able to operate on the reduction of the pus that passes into the body over time.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Moreover, the joint is bent according to its curvature; and don't tell the patient any cause, but rather that the hand is loosened and can't strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it's not an injury in it, but rather something strengthened with a cautery for the purpose of strengthening it and confirming some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the dislocation is returned, put on it a plaster that we have recommended, and let it be and strengthened for several days; and then it should be loosened and let heal, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of the patient is hindered and they are experiencing some gravity in their intestine, then apply a warm poultice to the affected area and massage it gently several times, until there is relief.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of displacement of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some occasions the fingers become completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger is dislocated from the palm or the belly of the hand, then stretch the finger and push the dislocation back in with the thumbs, until it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the head of the finger, and suspend it above the area where it is dislocated, and let it rest for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and stretch it until it is straightened and restored to its normal position on the same day, or within that same day if possible with continuous effort.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bind it according to the aforementioned method, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise it with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same with this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and bind it to that part and perform the first operation on it, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	It seems similarly when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter three.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When there is a complicated dislocation of one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and many vertebrae are displaced from their place, then in that case there is no cure, for death awaits the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is outside of their will, and they cannot retain it; and many members of theirs are softened, such as some limbs or both thighs or both arms, or one of these; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, because many times it is dislocated and many times the displacement to four parts occurs.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that one is already dislocated to the back parts and is called spondylolisthesis or more likely  it is named gibbosity.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the cure of it is that first consider if the gibbosity occurs from youth, because in that case there is neither cure nor complete healing.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which happens by fall or by shock or similar to these, the Ancients already said the manners of cure with sermon being prolix, from which the most returns with profit; but I have already abbreviated it for the sake of brevity, due to the proximity to my intention, to which I have explained and formed from diverse instruments, with which I will show and expand.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in the case of a tumor that occurs on the foot, there is neither art nor healing for it; and similarly in the one that is made at two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, none are cured except the one that occurs on the back itself with what I have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be laid out on their face on a high bench near a wall, and a stool should be placed under them to support them so that their foot is not hanging.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a wooden stick is placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bench near their head, and another stick in the air holds their feet at the other end of the bench.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And one assistant holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another assistant holds the other according to that method.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and underneath the sheet is tied firmly; and extend the end of the sheet to the stick which is near their head, and tie it to them; and then bind the other sheet around their hips and thighs; and behind their legs; and then adjust all the sheets and tie them to the other stick which is near their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then extend the minister's hand to the ligament at the part of the thigh, and do not move the two thighs and the ligaments of the nearby places where they are fixed, but rather hold them firmly as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine for strength until it returns, or he places on that one table, and then adjusts on the table the nearby feet until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three arms, and carve on the part of which we have said that is near the patient a place in which the extremity of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other extremity, and stretch tightly until the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, take the turn which is turned around with the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground at the back of the patient two feet, the length of which is one arm, and fix the other end of it also two feet; and let the length between each foot be a palm, and already made in each foot a hole through which the turn turns, and each one is held firmly on the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a wooden pole in which the turn is made, and let it be wrapped around the two trunks of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the extremity of it is a trunk in which the pole is formed, the length of which is one palm and that which is wrapped around; and on the other two poles is similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligaments that you have tied on the chest of the patient in the pole which is near the head of it, and the ligaments that you have tied on the thighs of it in the turn which is near the feet of it.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then behind each turn there should be a servant who will turn it with their hand, and the doctor will anoint the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then after the spine is returned and the area is anointed, then take a plaster made with egg albumen, and apply it; and put it on the plaster of the table from which the width is three fingers or about that, and the length of it is the quantity that takes the place of the swelling, and on the part of the spine above.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be tied with a ligament as we have said, and give the patient subtle nourishment so that they may be healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is some remaining weakness in the area at the end of the treatment, then it is customary that medicines which soften and loosen be administered for a long time, which we have recommended; and already administered in that place a plaster of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some times accidents occur in the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back, and it is suspected that it is due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which has already been weakened so that it is not advisable to administer this medicine to him, for it will bring about a rapid death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	It is known that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only cause dislocation, but also do not occur with the same small movement and cavity that occurs in the other joints.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated upwards, or downwards, or forwards, or backwards.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated upwards, and rarely forwards or backwards.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation upwards is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy side to the sick side, it appears longer and the knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the sick leg cannot bend towards the thigh, and it is the place where the thigh is separated by a swelling of hot cauterization, so that the head of the hip has already come out.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	In the case of the person in whom dislocation occurs at the joints, it is that the accidents of this are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	In the case of the person in whom dislocation occurs at the teeth, it is because the leg or thigh is expanded according to its complement, but it does not double that pain which is in the tooth, and if it perforates to go and cannot above that to the teeth; and the urine of him is retained and his anus is swollen, and you must watch the walking of him on the sole.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	In the case of the person in whom dislocation occurs at the back, it is that he does not expand the tooth, nor can he double that which doubles his anus, and the leg of him is thus shorter than the other, and the anus is softened, and the head of the thigh is in that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But reduction of the species of this dislocation is what you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already become accustomed to having it, you administer reduction to it and ointment according to its disposition, then it is not entirely in this cure; and therefore it is not suitable that a prognosis be made in this case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should reduce it by returning the joint to its proper place and extending it to the inner and outer parts, and moving it to the right and left, for it will strongly return and not require another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong minister who extends the patient's leg from the affected part, or with their hands, or with a bandage that is tied over the patient's knee; and another minister should extend the hand of the one behind to place their hands under the patient's buttocks; and you should hold the linen binding firmly over the knee, and have another minister hold the extremity of the binding.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it should be extended from the inner part or from the front to the back of the hip, or from the back to the buttocks.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And the extension of all those things should be in a way that the patient is raised from the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary to apply the specific treatment that I will speak of regarding its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the displaced joint, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is in the inner parts, make sure that the patient is placed on their back; and place a pause to the ligaments at the base of the thigh in the location where between the head of the thigh and the spot where the hamstring is found; and then stretch the ligament upwards from the part of the hip to the uppermost part of the buttock.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister should take the patient's arms, and press the thick part of the thigh, and stretch it to the rear parts with violent extension, so that it returns to its own place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of the easiest cure among those in which this member is reduced, more so than the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you are excused from this and do not obey the treatment with this species of cure at all, then it is necessary that both feet of the patient be tied together with a strong ligament, lightly, on both ankles and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each one be four fingers, and the patient's leg be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then let the patient be suspended from the top of the beam, and it should be on a mattress; and the length from the ground should be two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to gently press the head of the thigh, and let another youth be suspended with the patient, and the other youth pressing the thigh strongly from below, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	More in the proper reduction, when there is dislocation to the outward part, it is good that the patient puts on a poultice as we have recommended in having coldness; and let the ligament be strengthened over the sick thigh properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then let two cloths be placed, one at their feet, and the other at the head; and let adjusted cloths be placed in the middle of the poultice made on which humid draps are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by what the cloth is between their thighs, because the extension to the outward parts should not be attracted.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then let each minister extend to their part, and the doctor with their hand guide the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if it obeys to the treatment, it will be good greatly; and if not, place on that diligently and do as we have said in coldness for that wrapping.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	More cover that which the patient has on the sides of their bed a sheet.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then cover so that the leg is gently extended, and it is according to this medical narration on pus; and the doctor puts the palm of their right hand on the patient's languor, and returns the heart to the other hand, and with that tightening stops the extension of the front parts and the part of the teeth.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then do not cover so that the patient's leg is extended to the back parts, and it is raised from the ground; instead, cover that it is placed on a hard surface, just as we would do if their hip is dislocated to the front parts, according to what we have said about placing them on two hips; and it is on their face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is no error.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And cover that compression be administered with a board on the place where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, as the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and that is you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those groins and the patient stretches their leg and expands its six articulations, then you know that the member is returned as it should be — and then you adjust the two hips and put a plaster cast and stretch with a bandage so that the hip is not displaced in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then return the ligament and the plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When, if you see those swellings in the garment, then you know that the dislocation has already been treated, and therefore let the patient go to the bathroom.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and plaster it, and stretch it according to your first instruction, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then undo that, and make him delay walking on crutches for some days, until he is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle is dislocated in three ways, for it is dislocated forward, and backward, and to the sides more than the front parts; and the front parts are not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that it commands the patient to put their leg on their thigh; then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient do this: lift their leg up, so that they extend their leg if possible; place their two hands on their face; and hold their foot between your two feet; then make the ankle adhere to your palms, and press those together over the ankle with force, and another servant lifts their foot until the ankle returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of recovery in him is that his leg adheres to the thigh with a light non-working movement.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk for several days, until he is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	More so if the reduction of it to you is excessive, then administer a strong extension with ligaments which in the cure of the hip the preceding narration has described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes is injured by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of it is caused either by internal or external parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that the ankle is swollen due to the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure of its sprain is from gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with ease and held steady until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to the injury, it is necessary that you make the patient straight, and have a strong and powerful servant behind them in the middle of their back.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then put your right hand on the upper part of the foot and your left hand on the lower part of the foot in the area of the calf.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards your right hand, and with your left hand hold for two fingers, and stretch with your left hand; and press the chest of the foot with your right hand above the leg to relieve the effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice according to what we have recounted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the chest of the foot on the leg for the third time, and you are at the calf.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one or two times according to this method, and if the foot is restored to health, it's good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because that will restore it.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction of the limb is prohibited to you that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth firmly on the ground, and let it catch between their thighs, and you have enveloped them in a sheet so that the disease does not escape.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then one minister holds their thighs, and another minister stretches the foot with their hands or with a bandage that lies on the ankle of the foot; and then each minister stretches against the extension of their partner, and the cloth is stretched between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the lower parts above their extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor should adjust the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant should hold the healthy thigh to the patient's sides, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then apply a plaster and extract that with a strong bandage, and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware that you protect the nerves which are located behind the ankle, so that the bandage on that area is not violent and tight, so as to constrict it strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it like that for two days or for three; and if the bandage is loosened, tighten it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then undo it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is forgotten to remove the dressing from that place, it is not done safely that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted on it, and then that which does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if a hot abscess occurs to it, then beware that you administer in the evacuation of it that which we previously mentioned, in another place of treatment and of application, until it is reduced.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter four.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is advisable that one who is dislocated should be treated with a gentle extension of the limb; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then it is advisable to make the patient place their foot on the ground or on a table, and let them stand like that as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then put your foot on theirs, and press their foot on what seems to be the joint, and press down with your foot in an upright manner until it returns, and you will see that it has been properly treated and does not appear out of place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then put a table under the belly of their foot that holds the entire foot, which has two ends, and tie it with a decent and firm structure for three days; and then undo it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter thirty-five.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocations that are made with a wound or with a fracture or with several things at the same time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When accidents occur due to certain causes, and you are piercing through the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, many seen successes lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this it is not suitable that anyone presumes over the treatment of it, except one who is wise in the art, with long usage, merciful and pitied, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses in the commencement of medicines that cause abscesses to be cut out only, and lift the patient to divine judgment, but rather to the one to whom you expect salvation from loss, and from the sickness alleviation, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to remove yourself so far from it the reduction in the commencement of the cause, waiting for an abscess to be cut out.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as we wish, then administer treatment which will cut out the abscess and cure the wound with what is convenient for it from the ointments of the dried placents.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if there is a dislocation with a fracture and it occurs in the bones that are separated by joints, then you will pierce through their articulation, and do in this what we have said about simple illnesses of this type that precede in the locations of these.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid according to your ability the one who is in the intestines of fear, as my preaching has preceded you; for that which is better for you, you owe to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your body, verify those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus the words of Albucasim are perfected by the means of which God is blessed.
Amen.	A translation of "Amen" in
