Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus they begin with the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by the completion of it you will achieve perfection in it, and by its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I have provided you with a treatment that is part of the operation of the hand, that is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation of the hand is prostrated in our region and in our time totally deprived, until the science of it has perished, and its practice is stopped; and there remain of it only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which made the most errors and deviations to those mistakes and excesses until the intentions of it are closed and its force is elongated and the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I will revive it with the ordering of this treatise in the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes to the forms of the preparations of cauterization and of the other instruments of the work, as is necessary by addition of the declaration, and by preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why no artisan is found skilled in this art in our time, is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the joining of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and has the understanding of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their names, and their functions; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hippocrates said that a small word is enough, especially in the work of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy, it is not surprising that they fall into error, through which men die, as has been seen many times, because some are formed in this science and boast of possessing it, yet lack its practice and experimentation.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor having made an incision on a scrophulous abscess in the neck of a woman, and having cut some arteries of the neck, through which a great amount of blood flowed, until the woman fell dead among his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who ordered that he would swallow a stone of a man which was stuck in his throat, and the stone was large, and came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, through which that man on the third day died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called it foolish to extract that, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I suspected that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land to perform surgery, and he applied a black plaster to a patient who had a fracture in their thigh; and the doctor, with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, put a poultice on the wound, with strong bandages and tight binding, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And return the dislocated according to the desires of the sick, and return the relaxed, and return the loose one for all joints and command that we untie the ligament; and it is necessary that thus between the thigh and the foot an abscess forms, and it comes to a dangerous loss.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And it is called relief for him, and prepared to dislocate the ligament, and acquired is tranquility and thus removed are his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Greater corruption had already been confirmed in the member, for which it could not be restrained, and did not cease to spread the corruption in the member until the patient is in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who made a cancerous abscess, and it was ulcerated in the following days, until the evil of it was magnified with the lord of it, his master.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	This is because the bitter humor is pure melancholy, then it does not happen that it comes to him with all iron, but rather that it be in a member which suffers so that from it all is hosted.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this, sons, it is necessary that the operation with the hand be divided into two devotions: one is the operation in which health is associated, and the other is the work in which danger is in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already extracted this from every place of this book in which an operation is described where there is error and fear; for which it is necessary for you to guard against this and let go of that, so that the foolish do not accuse you of speaking and dishonesty.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And then take up your arms with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God to achieve health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and put away your arms from what makes you fearful, so that it does not diminish your faith and your name: for many are remaining for your glory, and may they be in the world and afterwards among your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Indeed, I have already spoken to some wise men:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat a bad illness poorly, so that bad doctors are not named".
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already devoted this book to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first from the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the head and the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the preparations of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second section.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on ventoses, and on plasters, and on extraction of arrows and on similar things to them, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on treatment of twists and on similar things to them; chapter ordered from head to feet, and on the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and on sharp medicine and memory of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is good to discern the quality of the juices of that cautery and of its instruments, and in which complication it is prohibited to apply cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the juice of cautery and its instrument is a long and prolix discourse, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many sages have spoken about it, and they are discordant, and for me it suffices to take a small part of their discourses, fearing prolivity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery is suitable for all universal complications, whether they are with material or without material, except for two complications, which are complications without material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex of the tail and dry matter, it will become disordered; because some said that a cauterized wound is helpful for this, and others said the opposite, that cauterizing is not convenient for an illness which is caused by heat and dryness, since the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is convenient that an illness of the tail and dry matter be treated with what is hot and dry to be healed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And it is said by him who says the opposite, that cauterizing is made helpful in all dry and hot illnesses that occur in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies and their humidity to the complexity of fire, you find men's bodies are cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I speak from the sermon of that one, who has already experimented on me several times to discover.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I more openly declare that it is not necessary for that which has already been proven and practiced in the chapter of cauterizing through previous exercise, and having understood the diversity of the complexity of men and the disposition of their illnesses, and the causes of those, and the accidents of them, and the timing of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other complexities, it is not about your fear, and especially in cold and humid illnesses, because already all doctors agree on those, and are not disordered in the help with cauterizing in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	It is known, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, is that a cautery in medicine is burning, because the fire is simple, its action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized and it doesn't harm another member near it but only with a small injury.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	More, the action of burning medicine reaches to that one in the members which is joined to it, and forces it to come into the sick member with difficult healing and forces it to be heard.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, by its subtle elevation and the goodness of its substance, does not make that which is superfluous; And it is known to us through experiment and through long duration of service in study of the art on the truth of the causes; and for this I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not that my free will is bound by this secret, I would tell you about the fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies, and of its expulsion through which we expel sicknesses, in a philosophical demonstration, which would be acute in your understandings.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do a cautery and they pause for the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which the cautery attracts, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and frequent, which do not suffer delay so that it is feared that evil will come, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus it is not seen in your steps, or, sons, that they esteem only the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that illness which is healed by cautery, all time is not required, and they pause to consider that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not seen thus by them because they believe that cautery is only in place of medicine, which alters the complexion and dries the humors, which are the cause for which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	More, I prefer cautery over medicine due to the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and that which has come to it through food and habits similar to those causes; but that the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humors, thus as cautery of tooth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in it the pain does not return, but rather it happens in a small place.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And most common speech is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the speech of ignorant people, not because they understand it, but because they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved by medicine or any other cause except through cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is to the contrary of that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not unless when we administer the ways of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the cause, we administer cautery, and apply it to that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And therefore it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not burn, as it is not absolutely true, because it has been proven and found that it does not happen except in certain bodies besides the others, and cautery with it is good and better than with iron, as they said; but however when you make cautery with fire or gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive cold; and if you adjust it on the ember, the gold melts by the fire, and sometimes puts in the fire certain laminae so that the artisan can work with the occupation of it.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, a cautery is made with iron, which we apply lightly and carefully to the rectitude of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head between the feet, so that I alleviate the demanding one what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for headache caused by cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization is opposed to humidity and cold on the service of the accidental one from which two causes are: it is a cause of swelling and multitude of flux, called rheumatism, of the head to the parts of the ears and of the hearing, and multitude of sleeping, and of toothache and of throat pain, and universally of all sickness that comes from cold, as well as paralysis, swelling, and apoplexy, and symptoms in those sicknesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this: that first we command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine, for three or four nights, according to what the virtue of the sickness and the age of him and his custom require.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him sit between your hands on a wooden bench and place your hands on his chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then stop the flow of your palm's root near the nose's root between the heels of the shoes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More emperor, when the said inner part is perforated, mark that place with a probe, and apply the olive-tree cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then stop that on the place immediately with a probe, in a manner that descends, in which the inner hand is constricted little by little, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and examine the place, and if you see any part of the bone being uncovered to some extent, such as the quantity of a grain of barley, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to its former position, or if another part is cooled, until it is seen by the bone that which was said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and apply it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then stop on the cloth dipped in wax and apply it until the scar is destroyed by the fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place with Tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healthy.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that the more the wound is opened, the better and more youthful the arm will be, for which it is better.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They said that some of them should have the tendon cauterized within the bone, and a cautery should be held within it so that a part of the bone's vitality is taken away.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then the part that is next to the bone should be scraped, and then it should be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they said that others should push the cautery from behind, so that it presses strongly into the bone, until the bone breaks, and this is the method of minor surgery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapors of the head are expelled.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the open wound should be held for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But to me, these two species of cautery have not been seen, except in some men according to the way of fear; and that, it seems to me, is better for health, because the head is revealed by solution of continuity of the urine as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cautery is safer and better, it seems to me; and from that practice and in that work, health is obtained.
Capitol segon.	Chapter according to.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head there is chronic and long pain and it is prolonged in the patient, and it uses treatments such as purges and suppositories and poultices and plasters and dressings and bandages and liniments and remedies, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not help due to the lack of knowledge of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frivolous and removes much cold, then that cautery is applied with another cautery, and place that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the horn of the sick head with a cautery in which the cord is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the cord and let it be uncovered by the bone the quantity that we have recounted, and cauterize that with a cautery in the right partition of the head, in the place which is called "vas" - and this is the place where the windy vessel is situated.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And raise your hand thus, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient through this will remove much diverse pain different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery is in its place, because it is known that the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is a more subtle cautery than that with which the middle place of the head is cauterized; and this is the method of it.
Capitol ters.	Head of the bed.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	From the cauterization of an old migrane.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the part of the head, or it is a sharp pain inside the eye, the head must be evacuated with evacuating medicine, and another cure administered, which has been mentioned in the treatises on illnesses; and this is not advisable, then cauterization can be done in two ways: either cauterization with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The best cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and scrape it and apply the ends to both sides of the affected area.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then cut into the place of the pain in the temple with a sharp knife, so that it enters and the abscess is emptied out, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then tie above it with a bandage to constrict tightly, and leave that for three hours; and then untie it and extract the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then apply a poultice on the affected area submerged in hot water until the place forms a scab.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with an ointment until it is healthy.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you see, make that with some medicines which I have written about in the second treatise on combining medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	We perform cauterization with iron in this manner: instructions for the cautery of which this is the method:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called clave or nail, because its head is like the shape of a nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part of it is a small protrusion.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand - so that the artery is not irritated, which is underneath - and move the small iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is irritated by the sharpness of the cauterization is as much as its size, then lift your hand so that the artery underneath is not irritated, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak a cloth in salt water and apply it to the area, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a clean bandage, and treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see fit, cauterize at the extremity of the cutaneous tissue according to the cauterization, and beware of the incision of an artery in this migration properly not ancient.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines with what we have said about previous treatments, and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes because of the illness that is not enough what we have said about the first cauterization by medicine or by fire, then it is necessary that you apply the cauterizing iron, which has been purified, on the place of the pain along the line of longitude where the greatest pain is, or in that area; and place your hand for a while and firmly hold it while you make an incision in the artery and penetrate to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard the continuity of the jaw, which is hindered by chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerve which moves it, and that there is no spasmodic contraction.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for one who ignores what he does and is not careful and is reckless; then leave the operation to someone who begins.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And you will come with the reminder of the treatment of accidental bloody flux in the manner of the liver's custom, in its own proper place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this sickness does not improve with this cautery and you see the patient's body tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you want, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in the chapter on constriction of the liver with a cautery having two points, and this is a better cauterization and more beneficial.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of the pains of the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with laxative causes and with the other cure which has been said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then apply the cautery, and this is what is called a point, of which this is the method:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And apply the point near the ignition, and let it be carried around the entire ear as if it were rolled, or in a circle around whichever part the pain is in.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Bring the cautery to the root of the ear little by little until you feel the place with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of twelve points on the entire ear, and which one, then carefully cure the places between which they are healthy.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cauterization of the tortoise or turtle, but more likely it translates to: Of the ca
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Tortoise, which is cured and with cauterization it is not except for the species that come from flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of the illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that proceeds from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of tortoise with earth and purge and evacuations, and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize the illness with three cauterizations: the first gives the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third gives the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And apply the cautery on the opposite of the affected part, because mollification is not seen except in the part that appears to be healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right of the extremity of the ear, placed a little above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the aforementioned thumb, and place your hand with the cautery until it is burned the quantity of the weight of the species of the codena.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is a specialty of the surgical knife, the shape of which is described in detail.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	More subtle is that which a little cuts the veins; and it is good to cut in the superfluous and gross part a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place with what is previously described as a proven remedy for the disease.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and it does not respond to your medication and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the handling of the cautery is done according to what has been previously stated.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it is healed with what has been proven.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On the cauterization of oblivion caused by weakness.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is good to give to the patient at the beginning large pills and lozenges that purify the blood.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then raise the patient's head and place it on a plaster or poultice described in this treatise of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then apply certain dressings, for that is the method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do it according to the doctor's order which has already been stated.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And then if health is restored to him by this; and if not, then apply three cauteries on the back part of his head, which are dependent on the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the thickness of the said bandage between each cauterization, and carefully treat the cauterized area with what has been prescribed.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you find the patient is more tolerant, then apply the cauterization in the middle place; and if your art is greater, then cauterize above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat it carefully until he is healed; and let the olive oil cauterization be according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	As you proceed with the purification of the head with earth and with what we have said; and raise the head of the patient, and apply a cauterization on it in the middle place of the head, and cauterize above all the horns of the head, and cauterize above the back part of it, and apply three cauterizations on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the malady of mollification of the body with many sufferings and the malady is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the spine of the back, and immediately with a cautery enter so that it is combined from the codena word of it, and elevate the third hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then return to cure that one so that it is healed, and this one will be cauterized with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter ten.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not the epileptic who is cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And thus it is fitting that you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with years and with another cure, which we have dictated in the division when the malady is great and the exception of medicines is tolerated.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is an infant who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargling and masticating servants to modify the service, giving that for many days, with improvement of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput of it, and on each horn of the head let it be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize them with the same cautery that was mentioned earlier, having previously softened and warmed the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the olive oil be cauterized according to what has been stated previously.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are rotten humidity and gross flaccidity, then cauterize them with the same cauteries that we have mentioned in regard to paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is a superfluous declination to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them a drink that purifies their brain according to what has been stated previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And rub the patient's head, and make a decently made plaster of egg on the circle, and apply it to the middle place of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be seated in a chair, and be held firmly from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And apply a plaster; it is also worthy to anoint around the eyebrows.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	He heats that on the hearth by tempered heating for measurement, which the said sufferer feels most in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that in the middle place on the head of it in the circle, and let it be inside so that it is refreshed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do that to the patient for a whole week, with another regimen of it inside so that it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that making small points according to the worse part of it, except that you hold your hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that cooked in butter or in broth of chicken.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter twelve.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of descending water in the thigh.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared to you the beginning of water in the thigh by the signs which I have already told you about in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient that which cleans the head of it, and keep it from all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make it sweat in a bath for ten days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command it to shave its head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of rising of water in two thighs, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one thigh.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Make incisions with a cautery on all the veins and arteries that supply the kidney; and let the cauteries be in that length in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of flows of blood when it is being cauterized; and if you see any flow of blood, stop it with some medicine, which is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries and in the removal of those and caution of flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some times it is cauterized on the neck, where two bones have two cauteries applied to produce a good result.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and dirty, and through the veins and arteries which are in the obvious place of the head before and it is verified that this is an excess of hot and humid blood, then cauterize that with a cautery, which we have mentioned in the chapter on beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle place of the head and with two cauteries on the neck behind the two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck behind the two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you indicate the addition, then cauterize that entire area of the heel on the extremity of the ankle with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of foul-smelling nasal discharge.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat the patient with the remedy that we have mentioned in the division and do not press your treatment, then prepare it and give to the patient the decoction for three nights; and place a rag on their head, and cauterize them with a middle cautery or an olive-tree cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that area with a nail-shaped cautery or two cauteries above the two eyebrows, leaving a small amount of hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware of the acidity that you do not set that on fire.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the nail-shaped cautery, this is its form.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cauterization for the softening of the eyelids of the wheels (or possibly "eyes" or "ulcers", considering the context).
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery or this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that one on the two eyebrows with a small instrument of two cauteries in all divided areas, and they are lengthened from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cauteri be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press your hand with the cauteri too much, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is touched.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cauterization of the eyelid of the eye when the skins are converted to the internal parts and puncture the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skins of the eye are converted to the internal parts and thus puncture the eye, cauterize in them according to two manners, either with iron or with medicinal caustic.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize it with a hot iron, warn the patient beforehand that they should lift their skins like those who are cleaning them, until they are lengthened and widened; and if you puncture that one, then bind the eyes of theirs with a bandage so that it is not moved until the skins are reborn.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are reborn and widened, place the head of the patient on a pillow, and put a sign above the eyelid of their eyes with a tape, shaped like a fig leaf, and let this sign be according to the shape of the wound, and its beginning near the skins.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then stop the flow of blood in an abscess or in a swelling of pus under the skin.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then apply the cautery of which this is the shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize on the figure that has been marked, little by little, in repeated touches, until the surface of the cinder is completely burnt, so that it appears as a figment of myrtle, entirely open and visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	Sign of health in the said work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already being contracted and the pulses of it being elevated due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then stop the flow of blood with a bandage until the wound is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that one with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns through the skin for some cause, then apply warmth and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery on that one just as you did previously.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin grows onto the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its own natural place and is smoothed out so that the skin does not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Put the cautery in medicine to burn this is what is commanded to the patient that they lift their skins while they are extended and narrowed, and then make a paper of cloth in the shape of a woman's womb.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap made from congealed and living earthworm, or whatever that is, and mix those things together, and make a paste with celebration so that it is not chilled; and then spread that paste on the paper which is made thus in the shape of a woman's womb, and apply that to one side of the hip; and apply the other hip wrapped in a poultice of warm water, and let the head of the patient be in the same position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then put the finger on the medicine and press a little so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for this biting is to them like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And then when they perceive that the medicine is biting, then remove the medicine and take it away from the finger; then when the biting stops, then wash the hip with water; and then consider if the eyelid is already lifted as if washed by the constriction of fire or incision, because this is what it is; and if not, return to the place where the medicine was not applied and do not neglect until the operation is completed and the hip is contracted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then stop on the cut with a border until the knot of the adjustment is eradicated, and treat that one with a deafening ointment or another one inside until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, that your operation be with diligent vigilance so that no harm from the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid after some days is softened and some cause of the pellets enters the eye, then apply your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly as it was done at the beginning, and put in a wrapper so that it may be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of the mold for eye salve.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of men are diversified according to size and smallness, and thus according to that your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let not be hidden the way of straightness to one who has studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of the fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with the method that we have spoken of in the divisions of illnesses and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: order the patient to put their head back, and hold the head of the patient by some servant between the hands, in such a way that it is neither hidden nor agitated with the head back.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then apply a poultice made from the white of an egg or the mucilage of plantain on the wound of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, such as the shape of a reed or the quill of a feather, on one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if it is necessary, let it penetrate to the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it come out like a tentacle.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But I consider that which is cooked is better for the said work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw out from it blood and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then make an incision on it and extract the purulence from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then apply on it the cautery which should be ignited, and you will hold the patient's hand with a little device to divert the attention from the pain to the nasal area, so that neither the hand nor the patient is disturbed, and then apply the cautery in the groin of the wound and cauterize it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then if at the beginning of the application of the cautery you see it enter into the bone, that's good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and let it be like that for three days, and then apply on that place a dressing with oil and wrap it with a bandage exsiccative until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	More often if the disease has lasted eleven days and doesn't heal, then use medicine with a sharp corrosive effect until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is convenient in this chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there's another method of cautery for fistula which some first authors described: put it in the place of the fistula and make a hole and return to that fissure with a subtle iron instrument, which is the shape of it: put in it the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand around it with good retention, and don't let the patient move so that the melted lead doesn't penetrate to the hollow of that; and cover what you put on the hollow of the patient with cotton soaked in white of egg or in water, because lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it with marvelous sanitation.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and the cure, it's good; and if not, then it's necessary to administer a tube through the nose and return the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will fit in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the fracture of the feet.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Warts that appear as cracks in the lips, and especially on the lips of infants.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the method that we have described in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then apply the small knife of the cautery according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the cavity of it be according to the subtlety of the cotella.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then gently push that knife carefully into those fissures until the point of the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an apostema is found and then it is broken, and then it is ulcerated, and then it is corroded, and a fistula is made, and then you treat that and do not deepen your treatment, then it is necessary that you apply cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that applied thing in the mouth of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron thing penetrates to the bottom of it, and afterwards make one or two openings; and then treat it with the method that we have described for treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus if the blood is separated and it is healthy, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and to remove the corrupted bone according to what will be said in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cauterization of the teeth and the softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and not cauterizations, then place the head of the patient in a sling, and prepare to apply the cauterization in the form that will be described later, so that you place the swab on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cauterization iron, applying it firmly, and make a small opening so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and apply the cauterization for a few seconds according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then let the patient rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is tightened and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by cold or heat, or if medicine does not cure it, then cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in a kettle of iron, and then take the cork and wrap it around the end of the stick, and then dip the boiled horn into it, and apply it to the painful tooth, holding it there until it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat this several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, dip the wool or cork in the aforementioned cow's horn, and place it on the painful tooth, and place it on a hot iron until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But the greatest danger in cauterization with fire is that you pay attention to the size of the iron or rod, and it be in the core of some thickness so the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery in the form of which it was found, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery cools; and do this several times until the pain is relieved, either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is proper that the patient should apply to their mouth the opening of a good pipe and hold it for one hour, and then return to scoop up; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you can extract according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cauterization of excesscences or tumors.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When excesscences are of phlegm and cold humors and are not obedient to digestion through medicines and you want the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form of which is this following, having two extremites covered so that the smoke of the cautery goes through the other extremitate, and apply that ignited thing on that apostema once, and another time if it is necessary for that, until it reaches the bottom of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then apply the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and return it for three days and apply on it a dressing in good wax until what the fire has burnt is renewed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with plasters and bandages and dressings until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or of the cautery is such that it serves to convey.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of the throat and of narrowing of the spleen or perhaps "Of cauterization of the throat and constriction of the spleen" or better:  "About cauterizing the
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes upon the channel of the lung, and especially when it is mixed with coldness of complexion, then it is seen that the patient should be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the vein at the root of the throat in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And beware that you do not touch the throat with the cautery nor press on the patient's spine except a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize it with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the patient's last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be done in the manner described previously.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with that which has been prepared, until it is healthy.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cauterization of lung disease and of coughs.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are from cold humidities and the patient has no fever nor wasting, and it is an ancient disease, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected areas of the lungs and liver; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be done according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, then your cauterization should be done with a pointed instrument called a "puncta", the shape of which is used in the treatment of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points between the sides to those areas; and then heal that which is treated with the method that has been previously mentioned, so that it may be cured.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And you should have the cautery having three edges, because the cauterization is done with this: in one session you can make three cauteries according to this method:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cauterization of the nipple, which is the tip of the helper/breast ( possibly referring to a type of tumor or infection on the breast or nipple area).
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the tip of the helper/breast is dislocated due to causes of lubricating humidity and it is not stopped at the time of its return, you must return its dislocation before it becomes a habit of returning, and then with a small movement it is displaced so that it goes back in, as we have testified, because primarily you reduce the dislocation, and then the patient is turned over on their back or side; and then you lift the codena which is in the inner part of the citillic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery having two ends; and this is the form of it: 
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the tendon so that it penetrates the other side; and the figure of cauterization will be seen with four or five cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus these subtle ones according to the quantity of tension; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And some treated areas are adjusted according to this count and for which there are five cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause on the cautery and cut it with salt, and make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is thus done, then cauterize on the muscle with a key-shaped cautery or with many pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is broken and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and many humidities come into the stomach so that it extracts from its completion and thus multiplies rumblings in it, and if you continue the manners of treatment and do not confirm, then it is seen that the patient is on their back resupinated, and extends their hands and their thighs, and then cauterize with three cauteries: with one cautery place on the chest for the quantity of a finger with key-shaped cautery, and with two cauteries place on the two sides of the chest, until the triangular figure of cautery appears; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted so that they will make a poultice.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the coding of the thigh.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the figure of the cautery is added according to this form, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized by pricking the one who is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you apply your senses to the stomach, applying according to the quantity that you want with a tent, and then cauterize that spot with the cautery; and then cure that spot with the cure that precedes it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the cold fever.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the liver due to cold or humidity or gross ventosity until it is expelled from its normal completion through excessive egress, and the disease is treated with what we have said and not contradicted, then it is seen that the disease is resupinated above its cervix, and apply a tent with three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the liver of the hypochondries, where one sees the dejection of man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be the one that exists between each cautery according to the thickness of the said thing, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press your hand on the moving cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the mixture of the specificity of the coda, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already spread their thighs, and raised their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And beware that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the specificity of all the coda be absorbed so that it is absorbed by all the body and penetrates into the intestines, for the coda here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the perforation of the abscess of the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an excavation or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will have grave gravity and sharp pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the liver, then the pain is greatly increased and many times the doctors have weakened the cure of it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, it is necessary that the patient be turned over on their back; and then anoint the place of the abscess with a tent; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled in a bundle, the shape of which was described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery inside which the entire cord is burned, until it reaches the spleen, until it penetrates where the blood comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one by treating the other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and on whom many illnesses have been diagnosed; but I have experimented with some tested things and thus dared to write about this operation, but above all, I have read that which is suitable for us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cauterization of ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancient doctors said that the root of aristology heals ulcers in this way: being a maker, and it is this which you take from the roots of aristology, a long dry root, which is found, and is of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge that in oil and apply it to the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at the location which is between the continuation of the arm and the neck; and with two small cauteries guiding them, slightly inclined towards the part where the beard is located, and with two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly towards the back parts; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with a cautery at the location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on the two sides of the chest, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not think that you will press your hand with the cautery, but rather it will be evident in the manifestation of the swelling in action.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient doctors said that they used a cautery of iron resembling a dart and ignited it, and put it in the location which is between the ribs, until they reached with it to that aposteme and extracted the unhealthy matter, as we have said in the case of the aposteme of the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, because where it is applied to the location of the fistula, there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Head or chapter
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the wound.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the wound of the thigh with what we have said about treatment in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are necessary, one of which is to make three or four marks according to the length of the wound according to the shape of the cauteries of the thigh, the shape of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same manner that we have described for the thigh cautery in this treatise.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand on the cautery, and let the patient be elevated above it two fingers.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another manner of cauterizing, which is that you should ignite the cautery having two virtues, which cause we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the tendon which is in the interior of the thigh where the vein appears to the sinister side of the patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you elevate the tendon according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two instruments, ignite the wick, in that entrance where those penetrate the coding of the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see it, cauterize with a cautery having three instruments.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you will cure the cautery so that it has ceased to give an arm over many hours, for it is most confident that the other preceding causes in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not applied in dropsy but rather on the spleen specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsical person with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that one applies cautery with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the coding.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then place the cautery iron near the opening so that it can be grasped for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment, place the cautery on that which covers for what will be added to their two intestines, and it will be fastened with aid of a healthy bandage.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery iron with which the belly is cauterized should be curved, according to the shape that is previously described, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as its form is previously described.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter thirty-two.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of the feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are affected by dropsy and are full of watery humor, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in the area that is between the ankle and the toe, and raise your hand with the cautery iron and do not press down; then raise your hand, and do not return it at all, because the salty water will flow out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Make the cautery iron in this form: And then make on both thighs two cauteries, and on each thigh let a cautery be made at the extremity of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And be the cautery according to the length of the thigh: place one on the outer and another in the middle part of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And let the opened wound be cured for a long time so that some water oozes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure the wounds with those remedies which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is affected by cold and humidity that weaken the virtues, which are the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is treated with various methods of treatment and not contrary, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cauterization of the virtue showing, then cauterize that with a large cautery on the upper stomach as has been previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four cauteries around the subtle navel, with a thin claveguin cautery; and a cautery on the upper arm or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the exuberant humidities and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the epigastric region and on the intestines, and firmly apply two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, which is a perfect cure of youth, from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 94.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are in the nature behind ancient hemorrhoids or one of gross humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confirm their cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus of the spine of the back, a little and a little triangular, and with a cautery above the navel for two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if it appears that the stomach of the patient is weakened and their food is not digested, and their face is often discolored, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the middle of the back with a keyed cautery, and let the cautery stay for some time open, and carefully treat the inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 95.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cauterization of the thigh near the abscession of the groin.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you dissect the thigh, then ignite the cautery that is assembled in a line.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited thing into the dissected thigh, and with your hand inside guide it so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And make there a remedy or two, for if the humors are excessive, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and properly cure those with it that contribute to the healing of the joints.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the shoulder blade, it is more harmful in young people.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the rectum, in the lower parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the rectum does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore when someone has a fistula in the rectum, and it is old and corrupted, with rotten blood and corrupt humidity, then that which is most worthy to be covered is what proceeds from it with subtle thread, and then feel the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned thread at the front.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply the cautery that resembles a razor.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the thread is inserted.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cautery on that area until the corrupted body parts are burned, one, two or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	Be cautious of combustion of nerves and veins; or if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place where it was injured.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and its matters are separated from it, and it rests thus for a long time, then you will know that it has been cured entirely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the matters are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the press of its bone corrupted, or this comes from those causes which will bring recollection to their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the kidneys.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or due to great abundance, and thus the cotyle of the patient is constricted, then it is fitting that you cauterize over the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a sharp-pointed cautery, by which the recollection will be pressed.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strengthen the cautery on the second with a small hold, so that three linear cauteries will come, and thus they will serve as more recent aids in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area and place a dressing on the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with a cautery on the right side of it, and with another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of nodes on the foot; and cauterize that area with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be applied to the hip bone as needed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the uterus.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come to the uterus, and because of this conception is prohibited, and the menses of it are corrupted, and the flow of them is delayed, and pain occurs in the abdomen, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the bladder; and with a cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be applied to the hip bone.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter forty.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors accumulate at the ankle joint, and are the cause of the swelling in that place, it is a sign that one thigh is longer than the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is found in which way it is bent.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, you should cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have felt with your hand in the circuit of the joint as it is turned, and so that the joint falls in the middle place of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let this cautery be of the type which follows the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize with three irons and an olive-shaped cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the thickness of the entire cord; and take care that which enters is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter forty-one.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said before and it does not help, and this is ancient, therefore you should treat the patient with gross humors with fetid or artificial plasters; and then cauterize.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The handling of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either a cautery with burning medicines or a cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It will be according to two scientific methods, of which one is that it cauterizes the area on the side of the patient with three triangular cauteries, in this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the amount of the thickness of the finger, and if the olive or grain-sized cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often the cautery is placed on the middle location on the head of the ankle for which there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize with the circle in which the form is previously described in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, that the circle be continent and burn the stiffness of the entire cod.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is adhering to the ankle and is not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh at the location where you find the patient who has the pain; and with one cautery on the hip, a little below the pubic area.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery cuts, then its depth should be according to the quantity of the spasm of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain is extended to the area proper to the toes of the feet, then cauterize that place where it hurts with a cautery for three points or four or more if indicated by that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains of pain being in the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize that place with a sharp-pointed cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And beware in all cauterization that you do not touch with the cautery so as to harm a nerve or a large artery, and that because of this you cause evil to the patient, an inconvenient or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen one and another of those whom I have cauterized on the hip and finished with the cauterization, and the leg became swollen within which the tumor reached the foot, and it became perforated and corrupted the whole foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then follows a strong flux of belly, and then comes death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men say in the cauterization of this cautery, that the method is: make a figure like a circle of iron, whose circumference is the size of a palm; and let it be hollow according to the thickness of a date stone or a little finger.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let that circle be another thumb; and let the space be the amount of the knot of the foot; and let those circles be divided into two parts; and let the length of those chains be a knot or two knots, and make in their margin a decently dressed iron in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then let it be ignited in the fire until it wraps and sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the ankle, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that wound with three cauteries applied in a single occasion.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then plaster that wound with paste and leave the open wound for many days; and thus cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this type of cautery we have made little use due to fear of its management, and because we have found few that take care of it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Worse than the cauteries is he who suffers them, and it is even worse for him in the place where it is applied.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	A worse cauterization in medicine is that you make two circles having an armula with a perforation in which the iron hook of the door would fit; let the length of the partition be on the narrowness of them, being two knots or chains those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which exists between each of the quantities of the thickness of the said thing; and they are opened underneath and above, and they contain themselves between them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then stop on the part of the ill person's flank, and press your hand on the part of the flank; and take warm water and put it between two cloths, and the quality of that should be with a small fire, a little at a time, and apply that for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient suffer the biting and adjustment of it — because that burning bites like fire — until the biting stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away the warm water from all the flank with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it be for three days and stop on that bandage until the blackness of the adjusted wound is cleaned, and let it be for several days, and beware of its putrefaction; this is necessary in treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it with an ointment until it is healthy.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or the leg, make a plaster for it that contains water according to what is done in the aforementioned ointment.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and non-extinguished lime, take a part of it, divide it into three, and put it in a new pot, from which the part will be perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the container.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And put the bottom of one pot into another covered pot, and pour over that alkaline and living lime sweet water which takes those with a finger, and once you have compressed them well with your hand for good compression, and release the pot that separates the sharp water from the part in the covered pot.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living lime and other renewed alkaline, because that water will then be strongly acidic, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for the operation makes a burning.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of medicines some are those with which it is cauterized, such as vitriol and honey and lime mixed together with soap, so that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen recounts of one of the ancients the operation and the cure with which is cured pain of water and of vein sciatica, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and that it is healed by a single glance, just as he recommends, because the man went into a bath and was already healthy before that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that a plaster of vert is applied, and if no vert is found, then a recent figua is applied; and the mixture is triturated with a few grains and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and is tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a duration of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put him in a bath and when his body is sweating, rub him on the ground, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that it's not suitable to use a cautery with these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Moreover, Escorides said that when the strict vein of the goat is cauterized, it benefits him; and let the cautery be done in this manner: take a wool and dip it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dry goat's fat and melt it in fire until it becomes charcoal; and put it on the wool and squeeze it in so that it is absorbed.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop doing it until the sensation of the biting reaches the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this manner of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of pain of teeth.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in the back are due to many causes, such as a fall or a blow or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, from an infusion of humid and cold matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is not applied except in this single case, which is made by an effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, apply evacuation to the patient with warmed pills and similar to them, which are made on the back where the pain is, three lines according to the latitude of it, putting seven or eight cauteries in each line, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let a cautery be made with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four with the middle clavicle cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cauterization at the beginning of gibbosity.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this sickness appears in small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they have a stiff structure in their legs, with elevation and restricted movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And we attack in the upper part of the spine and the nodes of the patient that have already started to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And then when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that part with a cautery that is circular in shape according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which takes the cautery on the entire affected part of the vertebrae.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the vertebrae with a pointed cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be properly spaced between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then heal the place within which has been sanitized with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cautery is not administered in yellowness that is made by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cauterization of gout and of joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And then how gout is cured from cold cause with manual cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they are alleviated by cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you should cauterize with evacuation of the circuit of the joint of the foot with heated cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And be an olive-shaped cauter, which is the form of this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cauter.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the teeth or to the other joints, and this hot iron reaches the end, then cauterize that area on each tooth with three or four cauteries of the entire partition with this olive-shaped cauter.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are needed so that these cauteries are necessary to you, then cauterize and do not press your hand too much with the cauter before, it being only surrounding the specificity of the cordon.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the tooth and the two, then administer the cauter that we have spoken of in the sixth chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called gout, then prick in the circuit of the veins thus as they turn, prick on those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if there remains pain in the fingers, then prick in the circuit of the veins over each knot and over the joint of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains push close to the joints or the muscles, then cauterize all the parts of the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is done and the flux is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the limbs and intestines protrude from the wound, and this is a common beginning, then command the patient to leave their food for that day and to use gentle laxatives so that the wound of their belly may be evacuated.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to hold their arms inside so that the intestines or the wound are not protruding outward.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return to the thighs of the patient and examine the rupture on the bone of the pelvis with a sign that shows the extremity of which is similar to the majority of circle at the upper divided parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, the shape of which is this:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Into the area where there is a lot of movement and sweating, tie bandages.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then cauterize the area with your hand holding the cautery upright, and in that place where you feel the bone of the patient's ankle in the middle of the joint; and if you did not succeed with the first attempt, try again.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And be careful with the movement of the intestine during the time of your cauterization, so that you do not harm it, lest the patient suffer death or some other great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery, if you do not touch the bone, your operation will not be successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is fitting that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then treat the area of the cautery for three days with a poultice until the scar is formed by the heat.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one with the other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient sit on the seat for forty days until the place and the wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And give that one nourishment according to the length of time of their treatment, which will cleanse the belly of theirs, and so that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of straining.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is time to get up, administer a gentle decent treatment, and keep that one for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let it be spared from work and from abundance of food and drink, and from violent vomiting, for when one uses this regimen of complete healing they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And we will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you want that they not protrude, then cauterize the rupture of that one with a heated cautery according to its quantity, and let it be that which is exuded from the coding, thus as the third part of it; and then treat that one with what we have said, and it will not be out of place.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And we have already said that some first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is done with a tent.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is customary to make a line with the cautery along the width of the wound, and another line on the bottom; and place your hand with a clavical cautery, but the first cautery is put more lightly and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of the throat.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain enters the limbs through a blow or a shock and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is advisable to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be of the whole limb according to its size and smallness, and virtue and weakness, and location of the throat and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then apply the cautery to it again; for it is customary with those pains that they be punctured in the limb next to the one to which it is closest, so that it seems that the patient will be healed with the cautery.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes treated with a cautery for great youthful humor, and more so if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you want to cauterize that person, consider if the leprosy is contagious and if it can be cured with what we have said in the division and do not neglect this, and be afraid of the corruption that comprehends the entire body and its entirety, then cauterize the person on the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another at the back of their neck, and on the forehead to the end of the hair; and two on the horns; and one behind, on the nape or servico.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally put your hand on the cautery a little inside so that it presses on the bone a small impression, and from this the dislocated ribs are rearranged, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the middle as it is prescribed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is seen that you should cauterize them with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and put a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the two clavicles, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on the shoulders, and one on each shoulder, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the sixth rib; and cauterize them on all the joints of the arms and hands, and on each heel of their feet, and on the soles of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves that are on the sole, so you don't damage them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, as they do from other things, because the body of the patient is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is fitting that the cauteries are large or small according to the limbs and the joints, as it is determined by the species of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery with flour of toasted rushes and with honey, and with another remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the cauterization of numbness or stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or dormant and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the cautery enter the depth of the skin a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with an ointment that is healthy.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And certain areas are cauterized, which causes numbness to the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back and gives movement to the nerves which govern that member, and the numbness is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not touch that except for one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and of the exit of the nerves throughout the whole moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of ulcers that cause mortification.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an ulcer is old and does not respond to the ointments of medicine, then you cauterize it with a pointed cautery, taking a little according to the quantity of the acidity of the body in which the whiteness and the color of it are restored, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with a flour of oats and of lentils mixed with rose oil and with leaves of arnagrosa, and with blood of pigeon or blood of curlew, each one a part and all mixed together, and then apply it as a plaster on the area, and place it so that it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cauterization of cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is suspected and you want to treat it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the area of the affected part as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle place; but to me it is not seen as such, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this many times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cauterize around the area in a circle as we have said, or with multiple small cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cauterization of swelling.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some swelling is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess of humor, or because of the age of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the swelling; then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, making small punctures; and immediately apply a poultice that will promote maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to make a perforation with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape: and apply it to the middle place of the swelling until it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied in that place where it was put, so that the body of the arm is alleviated; then return to cure that which is injured.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter (or Headings/Title) Four.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cauterization with corrosives.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes that thus as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if you apply that corrosive in the place where it suffered from the cautery by fire, then you will ignite cauteries of small nails, and large ones as is convenient in that place where there is corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize the entire affected part, so that you eradicate all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it be for three days, and apply on the cauterized places a dressing with oil mixed so that the scars are all eradicated and all corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then heal it with an ointment that generates flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, that's good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which is rotten in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	They corrode with medication certain wounds of sharp medicine, for that is a substitute in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	It is better to apply cautery on the focus of the pus rather than to evacuate it gently.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the treatment of it with sharp medicine in division, and therefore take that which of its humors is deficient.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 3.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cauterization of the claws and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Moor or tumor is found at the joints of the foot of the sick person who has a claw, and it is a thick, swollen cause, which hurts the foot; and cautery in these cases is done in two ways, that is, cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Better is cautery with fire, that you shape the cautery iron similar to a pen for writing, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that the claw contains in its entire joint, and it should have subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then apply the ignited iron to the claw, and then turn your hand with the cautery in the circumference of the claw until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it like that for three days until it starts to form a scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made from ground marsh salvage mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on for nine nights, so that it will eradicate the roots of the ailment.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the area with an ointment made from generated flesh, so that it will be sanitized.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and you see inflamed pimples on the surface of the body, mainly on the hands and feet, then take a cautery iron and dip it in water, and it is that you grab a needle of iron or of stone or of pumice, and place it on the nail; and then put a small quantity of hot water into the needle, and hold your hand, and you rotate it with compression of your hand, and be pressing the edge of the needle on the root of the nail, and introduce the hot water through the pressure of the root of the nail; and let the patient wait a little for the penetration of the hot water for one hour, and then remove it, so that the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do the same on the other one and then come out all over the places of the body where they are.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then heal those areas where the roots of the nails have been eradicated with an ointment that generates flesh.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter Three.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cauterization of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you have a patient with trembling caused by cold in the nerves or by fever of a similar cause, then it is customary to cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cauteri; and a cauteri on their chest, and another on their stomach, with an olive tree cauteri.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of theirs is relieved and the health of the cold disease is restored.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter Five.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cauterization of accidental ulcers on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When on the body there are spotty ulcers, and there are pustules or fissures which are made from gross corrupted matter; then it is customary at the beginning of the treatment to make an appearance, that it should be cauterized over every head of the fistula with a subtle cauteri of burned mint, whose extremity is extended with fire; or with a long cauteri of aristology; or with a slow-burning cauteri.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some wounds are cauterized with a mixture at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed to be cured, and the excess is broken up, making them healthy by removing those things.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	May the emperor command that this be done with proper evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter 56.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of accidental bloody flux by incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Treatments applied to the flux of the artery that is cut by the wound, which applies from the beginning of the pain, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and it seems similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore when it happens to someone, then you must cut with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and press on that spot with your finger so that the vein is constricted and the treatments entered, so that the flux of blood is stopped, and does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply the hot irons to the spots of the cauterizations, which are called "moxa" by name, and blow on them so that they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from them a small or large thread of the location and the wound in which the artery is broken, and apply it to the vein, firmly holding that you have constricted with your finger, and sew the cauterization so that it is bound and restrained, the blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you touch the vein and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And beware that you do not injure the nerve that is here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And be aware that when a lot of blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as mentioned before, or with extraction when it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of the veins are injured and the blood is constricted; or that it be tied with a thread or ligature for strong constriction, or that medicaments be applied to them, whose virtue is to constrict the blood; and they be bound with a bandage or with a tight binding.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	More so, he who administers a proper constriction with a ligature and binding, or with cloths, by means of applying causes that constrict and of similar things, does not do harm but rather benefit.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If the doctor is not present and no medicine is being administered, then treat with caution according to the indications for the orifice of that vein as we have described, and understand the great constriction within which the blood is blocked from the upper part of the wound, and above the scar the aforementioned should not be removed; and from above the scar apply cold water of great chilliness so that the blood congeals and coagulates; and also consider whether cauterization or medicinal treatment is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and of vein cuttings and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the teachings of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all the ailments in which a cautery with fire is convenient and with medicine combustible, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters concerning the treatment from the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter with that medical method, by which the one seeking it may be alleviated, namely, concerning what has been asked for.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	It seems that you should commence this lesson, cave, sons, so that you may learn what in this chapter is by fear that which is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And by that which it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many things are considered evacuation which is with blood and in which life depends on the aspersion of the vein or incision over the postema or perception of exiture or purification of the wound or extraction of arrow or incision of the flesh and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their hands there is death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that upon you does not fall that which is destruction, because some times it happens that you will treat men with many manners of evils.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them there is one who will rush to their illness and will hasten their death, and thus by the vehemence of that which he finds in his illness, and by the length of his illness, and with the illness is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those there is one who gives you to have hope and speech, you hoping for health, and their illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not consent to that which is shown to you by one who is of this manner; and let your caution be greater than credulity and your rashness; and do not presume any cause concerning this except through certain science, which proves what you must believe, and to which successful experience gives testimony.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use it in the cure of all your patients for prognosis and indication to him who is health converted, because in that you are helped regarding acquisition of fame and of memory, of praise and of glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and grant you direction and protection, for this is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have written and ordered this chapter distinctly by chapters as it precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure from head to feet, so that may be alleviated for you what you demand of it and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the heads of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often seen in infants must be given to the infants and when the nurse tightens the head of the infant, it relieves the swelling.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some times it happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I have not seen this illness except in children; and all those who I have seen with it, I have covered their death, and thus for me it has been a sad work on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of it was so magnified that one could not see itself due to the greatness of its head, and more that the humidity had increased until fatal heat.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is collected between the cartilage and the bone, or is collected under the bone on the vertex of the head.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on this case where the humidity is between the cartilage and the bone and the abscess is small, it is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in width, and let the length of the fissure be two nuts so that the humidity can flow, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And then if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, there are here two incisions in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is under the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head swollen on all parts and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand on the separated parts and it does not come back to its original place.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Make sure you sew in the middle place of the head with three sutures according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the humidity from the incision; and tighten the sutures with bandages and plasters; and apply an ointment of wine and oil onto it until the fifth day, and then dissolve the ligature and cure the wound with tents and poultices, and tie the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which considers how to open the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, because some times it is more in the occipital bone, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and so you should do the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be careful not to cut the artery and do not let the flow of blood and humors, because it will kill the patient due to that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called Hilassesse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When something reaches to certain colds or rheumatisms the lungs or the chest, and it is antiquated, and doctors do not agree on this cure, then the last cure in this case is the beginning of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And then cover when you want to incise those that the patient's vein makes near the head, and rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and hold the patient's neck with a cloth; and consider on the pulse the vein; and the places of each one on the places which are near the ears being pressed, and so hide themselves in some homes.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark the artery with a needle, and incise each one on the edge of each partition near the incision that enters into the bone, and let that be through the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, introduce the spatula under the artery and cut it to the incisions of the aforementioned parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two digits adjusted, because when any vein is incised, the blood exits with pulsating egression, which often escapes with frequent beating.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the spleen does not appear in the cincture, then take the measure of the width of three fingers from the auricle, and apply the sign with a tent, and enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which is taken from the blood is a quantity of twenty units, and take it from the patient's urine or blood, and all that is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and from the replenishment of the spleen of theirs.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the disease, then cut it out so that no abscess or gatherings form.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with dressings and with bindings of clean cloth, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter three.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the spleens which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When to some it happens that an old or chronic humor falls, through humid and agrimonious qualities in the sides of the temples, or a violent and vehement pain, and it is treated with the manners of medical cure and this does not alleviate, then we have spoken about the extraction of the spleens in the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The handling of the operation and extraction of those things is that the patient scratches the skin which is in the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by the pulse, and is hidden except in few men due to violence of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then stretch the patient's neck with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water so that the artery appears to you manifestly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take the spatulum of which this is the shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then scrape the cord with that which will facilitate entry so that you reach the artery; and then cut in one side and extract that from the superior parts so that you extract that from the cord and discover that of the tunics which were covering it, of the entire partition.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then envelop that with the extremity of the instrument, and then incise from that one partition according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and do not find a flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood of the vein that enters the thigh.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the wound is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with double thread of hemp or with cords at length, and do not allow putrefaction to occur before consolidation of the wound and a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess which is between two ligaments; and do this at that hour or at another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery iron within the bone with a cutting cautery iron where the extremities of it are cut, and it will stay in place of that half-healed wound.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this if the patient has fever or is of a hot complexion; for cautery is one of those things that helps with finishing humors, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is necessary to extract the varices that fill the space of an old ulcer, and let them be treated with dust decently made, and then let it be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow and with poultices within which it will be healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another vein is found with a flow of blood from the wound, then restrain that blood, either with a cautery or by filling the space of the cut, and press your hand within to constrict the blood.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if the cause of those things is not present to you, then apply a warm cloth over the area until the blood is congealed, and wet the area with water of vehement coldness until the acute pain subsides, and be strengthened according to what is suitable.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is easier in extraction of acidity is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, since you have seared the two areas with a thread, and applied it to each spot, without moving, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two spots, so that what is between the extremities of it, which are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	The sharpness of the two points should be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	It is better if the sharpness of one point is greater than the two, because if they are too pointed and close to each other, it will not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some thickness in those, the heat of the fire is held on them and the flesh is cut more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all works and also easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space be that which is between two hips the quantity of the thickness of the said.
Capitol quart.	Fourth chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure for bodies with acute and acidic rheums of the wheels ( possibly referring to the eyes, or more likely the joints).
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic rheums, and it is the body of those veins which are on the head, and they do not converge in any cause for the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already turns red and feels like walking as if it were a walk of ants, and the wheels (joints) of that one are so weakened, humidified in such a way that already their skin is constricted, and the eyelids are scratched by the acidity of tears, the ancient bitter mixtures used in the cure of those of this operation, I call that cure a waste.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to raise the skin which is on their forehead, and then insert three distant grooves on the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the groove is two fingers: one groove is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little above the movement of the tears which are in the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Be careful at the beginning of the arthritis which is located in two sides, and stretch your hand from the continuity of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each injection requires the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge applied or dry cloths moistened with which to dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert the spatula between the two pointed extremities, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the separation of the temples to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Scrape away from that all the cartilage which is between two incisions around the zygoma, which is above the bone, and then make this from the middle incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then pull this spatula and insert into the first incision another tool which is called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And push the edge of that sharp tool between the flesh attached to the cartilage, and the edge of it within the bone, and drive it in so that it reaches the middle fissure, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It seems that the incision should be continued in this apparent cavity of the coda, and then make it in the middle fissure entering into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And then purge the blood of a certain quantity, express the places of the veins of the congealed blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply a poultice on each warm fissure of old cot, and put it on those inflamed and wrapped in wax and oil and sharp vinegar, and beware that the apostema does not develop into an ulcer.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day dissolve the ligature and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then cure it with an ointment made from basilicon and oil and rosewater and other things so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of pains caused by cataracts and descending humors from the divisions of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When one has cataracts that are sharp and continuous, and the humors of the patient are attenuated and small, and already their regard is weak, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from them come pus, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and extrusion as a consequence, then you will know by this accident that the materials and cataracts do not come except from many veins of the divisions of the interior proceeding.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for those is this: that you command the patient to shave their forehead, and make an incision in the middle of it, a small one for the width (and start from the left temple's incision towards the right temple; and let it be an incision through the bone; and stretch out your hand with the fingers of the temples which are weakened by chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth and fill in between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or with bandages.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strew dust made from vine or oil over it so that there does not develop a post-cautery abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has diminished, then it is time to scrape the bone until new flesh begins to grow, and treat it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh heal, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collofonium and mix them, and from this make a plaster and administer it on these wounds of born flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the cure of that which falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral pebbles or similar to pebbles, such as iron and copper, or it is from plants such as seeds or beans, or it is a fluxing cause such as water and bitter vinegar and its similars, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And then when pebbles fall into the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear with the sun, and if you shake the pebble, it is distilled by some oil of violet or sisam, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the patient sneeze with condition, and stop the nostrils for fear of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then put in the ear canal some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to its separated parts, because moist heat is introduced with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not introduced, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called fine forceps, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is introduced with forceps, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a fine hook of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And then if it is not pierced by that, make a needle of iron and insert the extremity of the needle into the hole of the ear and close around the environment of the needle with wax and oil softened so that it does not come out except the needle.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract strongly with the finger pressure, for the mucus accumulated with that which we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	More if it is not pierced in this manner, then take of alum or prepared vinegar and with which the soles are pressed a small quantity, and place that on the extremity of the vein, and then wrap over that place decently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And then if it is not pierced with all the causes which we have recounted, then you should consider that which appears before, whether it be an aposteme abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of taking that is that you at the beginning anoint the patient's vein sephamical and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make a gash between your hands and turn the ear towards the divided parts, and make a small incision in the root of the ear and pour the grease of it into the place where it is pressed.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the lunar-shaped fissure penetrates to the stone, and the stone is obstructed, then this can be treated with an appropriate instrument; and treat the fissure at that hour with speed, and cure it so that it becomes healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the fatty growths that swell and become inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your external treatment, then take a subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer to him the abscession of that growth which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put it in warm compresses, and extract it with fine or subtle gestures, or with a gentle incision as previously mentioned, because the extraction of it is thus alleviated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered into the ear, it happens that the patient must use sneezing with conditioning to commence, and fill the other ear with an old cloth, and put on that ear where the water is, and if by this it is expelled, well; and if not, then take warm pebbles and onions according to the length of the finger, and heat them in the fire a little, and let the patient introduce one of these into the hole of their ear and press above one stone of that part and strike with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop pouring water until all of it has been poured out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been poured out in this way, you take a piece of paper or cloth, and put one end of it in the ear and stretch the other end to the fire until it is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And you put another cloth and make it in this way as many times as necessary until all the water has been poured out, and squeeze that one with a tube so that it is said to be an extractor of excess water from the body.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	More in the extraction of the beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, take it out similarly and to its likeness, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size which causes pain in the sense of the stomach, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and anointments, and the cause of it is considered lighter than all the other causes that happen in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of a worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise of distillations and do not confound your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with subtle gesture or with fine fingers, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow tube and insert it from below to above, which is the form of the treatment:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; and then suck strongly on it with a firm suction, and make repeated motions, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey your assault, then stop up and close the circuit of the tube with wax as we have said; then administer the distillations which the ancients have already proved in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be that with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that one of silver or of bronze, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and with a flat surface.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore it should be as one would pack that which is in the cavity of the tube so that it will be necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the thread and wrap it around the extremity of the tube decently cut, and then put oil in the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever of these medicines you want in the tube — and this is in the ear —, and then insert the thread with its end into the hand and press with your hand a tempered compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which has infiltrated in the ear should already be scraped with a small focus.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And beware that the cause you distillate in the ear is not too cold, because ear medicines do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of obstruction of the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some infants have been born with imperforated stomachs of their mothers, and this has already happened to some men, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a plague or flesh growing in it; and this obstruction sometimes occurs in the passage of the ear's tube, which does not allow for evacuation, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the tube of it, which does not allow for evacuation, is among the major conditions of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that case where you achieve evacuation, take care to put the ear of the patient towards the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if you see apparent obstruction, open it with a subtle spatula, of which this is the shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it has a small width, where one part is sharp and the other not, and the spatula is two fingers wide so that it does not cause injury to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or in the middle of it, then you will apply subtle and violent facilitations until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the fold of the ear, then take a subtle thread and warm it with a little fire, and place it in the middle of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you have perceived an obstruction in the ear that the patient feels as a difficulty, due to gravity of hearing, force out the oppression with a facilitation; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place a poultice on the ear made of linen according to the quantity of the size of the wound that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take cotton and put it in hot water and pulverize it over the affected area and use it; and if the ear has become apostemated, then remove the cotton and replace it with another cotton that you will wrap in wax mixed with rose oil, until the aposteme is cauterized; and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	When there is an excess of blood flow, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use another remedy that restricts the blood flow, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 3.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of cataracts that have developed on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Cataracts that have developed on the eyelids of the eyes, some treatments are moist, others are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, hold those in your hands or on your knee, and separate them with the spatula of their roots, and apply pressure on the places, following the prescribed method.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When there is pain with a flow of blood, then cauterize those areas with a subtle, lancet-like cauterizer.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to apply incisions and moist dressings that promote healing when some cause of the roots remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment of cataracts that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Moist spots appear on the eyelids of the eyes for some reason, which is similar to cataract in its strength and hardness, and because of this similarity it is called cataract.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	It is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid and underneath.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is what you consider then if the greatness proceeds in it in that which appears of the eyelid and is bad in all parts; and the cause of it is laziness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Then make an incision on that part with width, and return the corrupted flesh with ease so that it evacuates, and hang that part with a bandage and cut off the dead parts.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	More so if the incision is not made on it, then do not penetrate the eyelid with a small cut little by little, then this does not harm for any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from that because the angent of it restores and regenerates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the greatness declines to the inner parts of the eyelid, then remove the inner surface, then evacuate the eyelid and hang the greatness with a bandage, unless you indicate an incision, and press on the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this does not harm for any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the treatment, wash the wound with salty water; and cure the area with the liquid that promotes healing from within.
Capitol .x.	And then put a bandage, wash the wound
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment scratch on the eyelid of the wound.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A scratch is a grievance which is generated in the eyelids, and mainly it hurts children, aggravates the wounds of those who have cataracts, and prevents them from looking at the clarity of the sun because tears are collected in their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason they rub their eyes on their faces for a long time, and they sleep with their faces down; and also their eyelids are humid from the discharge, which has already covered the inflammation, and a sign of cataract is apparent in the wound; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the cataract inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And a certain method of operation is for the one who has the disease, to hold his head in a cloth, and then put a warm wrap on it and make a plaster, and make a circle according to the amount that contains the entire affected part, and then apply this on the area and press with the fingers all around so that the cataract is collected in the middle of the circle, and then make an opening in the middle of this humidity with a spatula through the fissure with caution, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the stomach cavity that you find the entire intestine wrapped up inside, so that it reaches to the diaphragm, because in most cases the intestine processes through a fissure according to the form of white grey matter.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that bone with the rags you have enveloped between the strings of the divided parts and turn it around with your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not adjust in the fissure so that with the spatulum you do not reach the hole and you do not touch that thing.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a small one with facility until the intestine comes out; and then extract that bone as we have said; and then soak rags of flax in water and wine and vinegar and place them on the area and hold them with bandages.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus they are applied with salt and placed in the cavity of the fissure so that it absorbs the remainder of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then heal it until it is healthy.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	More if there appears on the spot a hot abscess, then treat it with cold plasters until it is healthy.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter eleven.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the manners of touching the urine.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the urine there is a born plaque that adjusts to the natural pellets and becomes ancient, then those who are accustomed to the urine and make it come out in manners of maladies such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelid and web between which this is cause of destruction of the urine that is called touching of the urine, and cure itself in four manners: either with cautery on the focus; or with acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter of cauteries; or it is done by touching for incision and suture; or with canes as I will direct.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And then it is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your thigh; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle in that part where there is faithful flesh under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate to the faithful tissue, and this be — near the margin of the eyelid where the lashes are born — near the lashes, and pull the thread to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn it to the edge.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then put a thread in the partition of the eye, adjusting the skin with a spatula incident to the larger tear duct entering into the smaller tear duct; and then extract the filament and place it on the eyelid, covered with a small piece of cotton or cloth, and then sew above the eyelid with a needle, and let it be like the figure of an iron instrument.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	More importantly, consider that the figure should be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because this is diversified in men, since some of them indicate that a large quantity should be incident on the eyelid, according to the quantity for which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then put a thread on the spatula over the two lines that you have sutured, and begin from the larger tear duct into the smaller tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your natural skin opening is as large as the thickness of a kidney.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then put the hook in one of the two corners of the wound, and then scrape off that entire area, and then adjust the suture with the two lips to the skin or thread of fine flax, and let the blood flow out, and make adhere what is superfluous from the threads onto the eyebrows for some hidden causes, if you want to do it, and if not, do not cure.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then heal the stitching of the veins within three or four days, and then take care of that.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the wound without stitching, and treat it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is lifted by the separation of the wound and the aggregation of it; a better stitch is not needed. Thus said the ancients about the treatment.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	More emphasis is placed on being solicitous over the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another manipulation in treatment, which is that you make a figure on the eyelid like a fig leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three separated and gathered sections according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible, to have the sections, and it is not stitched, then take a needle in which there is thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and pass one end of the thread near the larger tear duct, and the other end of the thread near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between the threads so that they are equal, and then with those, lift your hand with equal elevation, lift all the skin over which is made thus as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture, and cure that interior part that needs healing.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	More often if an abscess forms on your incision or your fissure, apply that abscess with wax and to the similar area, with an ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some times it happens to the eyelid that the eyes are converted, therefore beware that you use in that case what we have said about incision; but a suture is more artificial in every case.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To prepare a pipe according to this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you convert the eyelid and divide the figure which is next to what has been reported; and then by art make two pipes or two subtle rods from which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the extremities of each separate parts, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each one subtly under what is overflowing from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the pipes of each part with a strong ligature, and leave it for some days, so that the thread by the constriction will die and be rejected and will fall out by itself when you remove the ligature.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	More quickly if it is delayed, then cut the torment with the tongs, and promptly cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore when it is congealed, the eyelid is lifted and the skin does not puncture.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the shape of two canulas which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it has the quantity of the length and of the width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter twelve.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	About the lifting of puncturing skin on the wound with a needle where the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and punctures the wounds, then the operation on it is that you take a fine needle and place it in a thin vein of goat and lion, and promptly adjust the extremities and anoint each one with a very subtle ointment.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be of the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you join another fine thread to it in short fashion, and anoint the extremities of that one if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's sick head in its proper place, and let it be near the window so that your work may be declared, for this is a subtle and minor operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the adjusted pelvis where it is necessary to inject, and make that penetrate into the festinating palate until you extract it from beneath the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin inside out and insert that into the hip joint, and let the skins be one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with it inside so that the skin is turned out at the hip joint in the festering wound on the natural skin of the pelvis.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	More if the hip joint is strained and the skin of the pelvis is not turned out, you will strain the hip joint at the separations of the faith that you have composed with it, inside which there is straining of the joint above the flaw.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And apply that to the vision of the wound, for then you will turn out the hip joint and the faith, and wrap each one and close the wound, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its own place and grows over it with good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin of the pelvis is too short, then adjust a long skin of the natural skins to it, and elevate it with that, or let it be until it is lengthened in a suitable space, and then elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter thirteen.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of the disease which affects the lower eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it occurs in the eyelid, it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted on its own, either to the right or to the left side, due to poor healing of a wound or of a cut or of a cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this contraction can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor healing of a wound or of cuts or of cauterizations, or by bad treatment.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Make the manipulation of the operation on it so that you sew up the consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and put between them a piece of cloth, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not think that you should use the treatment for it of the causes that dry out and constrict, because if you do that, it will return to being ulcerated worse than before, at no time will there be healing.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for that cause things that soften, such as fenugrec, and anoint with the water in which they are cooked and a sixth part of it, or diaquilon ointment, which should be liquefied on top of the olis, and submerge the piece in it, and cure with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with a tool that is not consolidated according to the form that was established at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have spoken of, is nothing but a rectification of the dislocation that does not restore the shape of the place as it was beforehand.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the cure of dislocation which is done on the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This dislocation which is done on the eyelid, which is properly named dislocation; and it is of two kinds: one natural, the other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is caused by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of performing it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread appears at the two extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh to the separated parts, and sew that with the needle, and cut it with a spatulum abundantly.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And thus if the shape of the eyelid returns to what it should be, that's good; and if not, take the thread and pass it through the cleft figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and make two fissures on the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision are where they converge, and let there be made an angle between them, when they gather, a figure is formed from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is called Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then place the flesh of that area according to the quantity that is the width of the needle, what is called the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then join the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then heal them with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices, so that it is sanated.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it is necessary to make an incision by fissure or suture or cautery, then it is advisable that you make a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid as has been previously stated.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate it with a poultice between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the sermon on the cure of sciatica when it is on the back or hip, that runs in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of sciatica, and this is in the form of diverse motives.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan always prepares a device in each manner, which is possible for it to make the figure return to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what is convenient for him of the operation and of the instruments in the best dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter fifteen.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to some men in such a way that the eyelid becomes solidified with the white of the eye, and is prohibited from the ease of movement and its natural functions, then it is necessary that you intervene with the extremity of the eyelid, and lift it up, or stretch it to the corner.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you cut the adherence with a subtle spatula, which should not be sharpened to the point of cutting, having obtained a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remaining with the spatula so as not to touch the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it excises that adherence with ease, so that the eyelid is returned to its natural shape and all the adherence is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put in the eye salt water with which you rinse it; or distill from juniper dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a decoction of it, and apply on the eye a woolen cloth soaked in white of egg, and then for three days use consolidative remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter sixteen.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh of the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	It is known that the nail is affected in two ways, either it is nervous, and resembles a hard subtle callus; or it is non-nervous, resembling a white condensed humidity, which when touched by iron, if it is forced to take it on, it is separated and the iron is not fixed to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin except from the large tear duct, which enters little by little and covers the sight, and prohibits light and the movement of tears.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The best way to operate in the incision of it is that the patient should hold their head back, and then open their eyelids, and elevate the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with the iron of little duplication and extend it to the separated parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a thread of horse or of goat or of cow, or of similar ones, or strong wire, or double the extremity of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread; and extend it to the separated parts, and extract from the thread the humor that is in the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow that which enters into the skin from the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remainder in the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or with small forceps, and release the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by incision of that there does not develop a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with the sole of the foot extended or with wire, as we have said, and then it is scraped with a spatula the claw of which this is the shape of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and that there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then make an incision in the wound a little of salt tartar or two fingers made from signs, and let that enter into the other day; and then treat it with water that covers until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot put the needle, nor is it fixed on that joint, then this type of nail is treated with medicines, and is healed thus as it was and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then you open the wound of the patient and take a subtle spatula of sharp iron according to this shape:
am subtilitat.	I am subtle.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that the thing is refined and condensed and inserted into the vein, then distill it from your hour in the tube of clear glass made to filter or with clear pipe or with salt dissolved, and strain the liquid through the other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then return immediately to the operation until all that is of it is removed, unless on the contrary an abscess forms in the tube, for then you will leave it, and cure the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your operation on that thing with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The protrusion of the tear-producing flesh, if it bothers in the eye with great nuisance, should be suspended with a lancet; and cut that one part, and do not push the cutting so that you do not cut the flows of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then distill in the tear duct a clear pipe or a filtering device until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of the gum and that which is born from the adjusted flesh in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In the eyes of some people, red flesh is born, and it is placed over the pupil, or it approaches or presses on the eyelids and forces them to shut the eyelids at the outer corner and it resembles the beak of a pomegranate.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	During the operation on the patient, keep their head still in a bandage; and take the flesh of that area and collect all the meat with a convenient onion to that, and put it in a forceps or in a chest; and then cut the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the incision, and beware of the vein so that it does not escape during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with the tool that you use to cut those things or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forked instruments with which you collect the abscess according to the shape of the area in question, as described in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When your incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then fill the vein with trussed salt, or apply a powder of roasted and ground medicinal corrosives, and place on the wound a dressing made from egg whites until it is ensured that there will be no aposteme or cauterized area.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains some cause of gangrene and it is cauterized with a hot iron, and you fear aposteme or cauterization, then wash the wound and treat that aposteme with the thing that caused the aposteme, and apply it on the area where the operation was done until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which adheres to the wound of this condition.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	More than emperor you should take total care of the patient's free will by natural means or by accidental means, working with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is sufficient for the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of sweat from the body.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Sweat that comes from veins is what is collected on the body and obstructs its functioning, and delivers the body with length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the body in which sweat is, is strong and in it there is no other illness except sweat, then you collect that sweat.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to raise their sick head, and you suspend those veins with a needle or with two according to your prudence; and let that needle be of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two needles gradually in a body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then you will collect those veins with subtle forks, with subtlety, and you will evacuate the blood at one hour or another hour, until you see those veins being emptied of the body and being evacuated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not injure the veins at the extremities of the spatium; and if your operation is in the middle of the day under the sun, and be very firm in your operation so as not to cut except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill in the vein clear water or rosewater so that with its acidity it cuts away what is remaining of the corruption.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you to collect at that hour, then apply a plaster with what alleviates the pain of it, and let it be for several days until the pain is calmed and until it is assured that there will be no abscess or cauterization.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed over it according to the method that the matter requires until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the fractures:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter nineteen.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of fracture of the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat a fracture with a cauterization or with sharp medicine according to what is prescribed by the narration of it and it is not healed, then do not put anything in it except that you apply a bandage on the abscess until the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and from the pus until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone and sometimes the corrupted or blackened part is discovered, then you will use a instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	It is called a rough head, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be rounded so that it can be made pointed by filing or with a file for subtle puncturing (just as it is in the following figure).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And apply that to the corrupted area of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand gently so that you can feel whether the corruption is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent remedies.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the area is consolidated and it has grown good flesh and it has separated from the body of the wound and stayed for forty days, and it does not get worse and it is not inflamed and there are no accidents, then you should know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in the skill but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: which is that you discover with iron or with sharp medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three teeth according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the exteriority of the iron triangle be, and the thrust of it be primarily extended into the extremity in the same way as many times as necessary.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then stop that on the bone, and it should be near the tear duct; and move your hand a little from the hole, and then turn your hand around the drill that penetrates all of the bone, and the patient feels it as such that it opens up a passage for air to come out.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the place with medicines that dry and constrict, just as you were instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter that flows to the partitions of the forehead returns to the nose, therefore it is easier to put on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the hole.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hole protrudes in its entirety and does not cause any discomfort or diminishment, then it is good to laxate the patient, and then to follow them, and then to make scarifications on the neck with good suction; and then to apply a liniment on the hole made from acacia and aloe and resin and sarcocolla, and then to strengthen the plaster over the hole with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The handling of the poultices is that you take cloths of linen cloth, and each cloth should be folded in four layers; and make from those cloths.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place one of them on the other according to the quantity of which the wound has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then stretch over them a hard cloth with strong binding; and apply the cups with suction through scarification; and then remove the cups and dress the wound tightly by day and by night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	More often if the ligament is softened, it is good that it be tightly bound.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then dress the ligament by day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, that's good, and if not, then apply the plaster with poultices and binding and cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the uvea (possibly referring to a part of the eye, with "uvea" being related to 
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunic of the uvea, and it is prominent and protrudes out of the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape is that of a man for this reason, and you want to cut into it, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea on the lower part and also put the other needle which has double thread of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate and let go the first needle according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with that the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and bind it tightly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and pause on the woolen cloth infused in white album of glue, and release that which holds the thread in the wound.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then heal the wound with what comforts it so that the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And some bandages gather the entire wound with a circle of cloth around the wound, and then it should be perforated with a subtle spatula that comes to the surface of the wound, and clear the albugineous humidity, and descend the wound and enter as much.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of swollen glands.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called alconati is nothing but a cyst which is joined to the wound resembling descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	More, the manner of operating on it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and upright seat, and then take the head in your hands from both sides, and move it so that you see the cyst coming to the lower parts, and then it should be dried and not descend, and the lumen should be stopped, and the patient sees the causes thus as they are seen.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent is not prepared at the healthy one with the water that we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take subtle spit and put it on the outer corner of the eye where the conjunctiva meets the cornea (in the location of the lacrimal punctum), until the healthy one is ejected.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then when it is ejected, you distill in a tube hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be cured with the other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of the descending water of the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already spoken of the species of the water in the division and what it is convenient to pierce with serum, then declare that according to the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and lift their healthy eye, with a tight bandage.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the healthy eye, if the eye with water is the left eye; or your right hand, if it is the right eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then take your right hand to grasp the left one, if the pain is on the left; or take your left hand, if the pain is on the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then stop the extremity of the left hand near the crown due to the thickness of the vein in the white of the painful eye from the side of the tear duct, and press the thumb of the left hand with force and turn your hand towards it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the left hand has already been introduced for an empty cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And take the measure of the left hand to grasp the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the eye; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then stop the left hand inside the place where the water is, and lift your arm up to another level, and thus if the water descends immediately, then the patient will see above that which they were looking at before, and the left hand in their other eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you will place another layer of cloth that is more than the left hand was previously.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is sitting and not descending, then extract the almond with ease, and stir in that hand little by little, and dissolve in water a small amount of clear salt of gem and with that wash the hollow tooth; and then put on the hollow tooth a cotton plug or a stopper or flannel infused in oil of rose and white of egg and bind it with that to the tooth.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Many of us, and those who are of our time, put on that which is ground with white of egg.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not obey your almond to the entrance of the tooth because of its hardness — for there are some men whose tooth is hard as stone —, then take the spatula which is called alberin, of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that conjunction, and do not put your hand in the hole, and it is not that you should make a way to the almond place subtly.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the almond as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And give the complement of your work, let the patient sleep in a prepared place, made in such a way that they sleep on their back in a dark house, and be prohibited from all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And put in the nature of it that which is suitable so that its nature be clean, and do not move the head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligament follow its natural position into the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then dislodge that from the dark and hidden place and cleanse the foul vision, and make the veins see some causes, and then return the ligament into the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not attempt to do this at the hour of the purifications or unless the infusion is near.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Be careful that you administer this so that the water may pass gently and with great and vehement regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If apostema abscess occurs, then be careful that you undo the vein before the seventh day, and correct that with this which will cause the abscess to fall.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you will absolve the vision of it and place upon the face of its mouth for which will be ruled the evacuation of it, it having existed in the dark place for some days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let it be extracted from that place gradually and treated according to its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in this case the disciple of vision is not excused from certain watchings, and then you will be careful about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has reached us from some of those who are at the Artach, and some say that fire is made in the Ayraic cave, which is perforated with what the water flows through.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Maybe the emperor or someone of high rank has not seen it in our land, which would have perfected this, nor is it read in any of the books of the ancient authors; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of illnesses for which there exists a remedy for those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or of steel properly, and their extremities are sharp with this subtle triangular fineness, the pointed extremity thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths, from which some cause is assembled like a tail of a fat worm, or a polyp of fish; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that represented fish tail.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And from it is cancerous flesh, of a dark color; and from it is flesh that is not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is in these non-cancerous and non-deceptive flesh, it is good to make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and breathe into their nostrils, and prick the tendon once in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the divided parts of the pus, and examine what you have understood from those wounds with subtle spatula of one part, so that you know that all the flesh is already gone; if there remains some cause for which removal is possible, then use one of the subtle instruments with ease to remove the cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is a painful or acidic postema, then stop the flow of what flows; or if it is one of the malignant postemas, then touch and cauterize that so that the sane and the wounds are all opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let it be put in the nose with incision of vinegar or sharp water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is opened and humidity from it proceeds to the palate, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then know that within there is dead flesh in the purulent pus of the nasal bones to which removal has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then it follows that a thread is passed through the eye to which some thickness belongs, and knots are made in the word knots, and between each knot the quantity of the said or measure, and anoint the patient and pass one end of the thread into the nose with a needle or other instrument by which it is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when that aura is made, which attracts the mucus from inside so that it passes into the channels of the nostrils, and is expelled over the mucus's receptacle, because repeated evacuations seem to do this action to the children in the schools, and it is a legitimate cause for one who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then pause with the two extremities of the vein, one extremity that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a tight closure of flesh at the nostrils that are in the vein, and make it enter so that you know that the flesh is already at the nostrils of the vein.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the vein, and pause in the nose with the abstraction of a blood vessel, and make it for three days or more until the poultice corrupts all that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a tube of lead for several hours until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	More if there are needs of cure that are urgent, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument to be used for purging, in which are distilled oils and medicines into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or of iron, which is similar to a small covered lamp, thus as a small shell, and the middle similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument is to be made with a flat, uncovered tip; on which you should put a handle at the back, with which you hold that which you extract from it, or that which you want from the juices and subjacent causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this purging is precious: take some castor, white hellebore, ginger, and a bit of saffron, long pepper, hyssop, and a pinch of spikenard. Mix these with the juice of beets and cabbage, and make into pills, and one pill should be dissolved in warm water, and given through the nostrils of the patient while they are sitting upright.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the nerves born in the extreme parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many nerves are born in the extreme parts of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned in certain days when the regard of it is treated.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason you should note that which appears at the beginning of its appearance, and inherit all that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then apply a cauterization or medicine burning on the place where it was, to treat the area.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the incision is delayed until it becomes large, then consider if it is hard, of dark color and of little feeling, do not touch that iron tool which is an ulcerous aposteme; because many times it appears to one who has cut this aposteme with great evil on the one on whom it had.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the aposteme is of a fiery touch and not of dark color, and at times when incision is possible on all that, then evacuate the patient and cut without fear, and treat the area with what exudes and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by a wound or by similarities.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Be aware that when there is a loss of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer success in that operation except for some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you come upon some cause of these, consider if it is a fresh wound with healthy tissue, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and closely treat that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the loss of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is advisable that you excavate each part of its underlying flesh until healthy tissue appears.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound to the suture and strengthen them, and on top of them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and crushed plant, and apply a plaster made from plaster of Paris or another consolidating plaster, and leave that dressing on for two days or three, and then remove it and replace it with new plaster, and leave it on until the wound is scarred, and then treat the inner wound with an ointment so that it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The best way to do the suture is that you add a solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution of continuity to the thread as you were taught.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided teeth.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Some visible ulcers appear in the divided teeth of their lips, some aposthems similar to a bunch of grass, and some of them are minor and some are major.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should convert the lips and wounds each one of those hardnesses into a whole part, and then with the abscess cleans the place with tritted blood so that it is restrained, and then wash it with warm water and treat the place with what is stipulated, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter twenty-eight.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Gather the nearby veins above the adjusted gum flesh, which the ancients call Albulus, and note that you must suspend or hold that vein with forceps and incisions to remove its origin, and let the blood flow or the wound.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply a poultice on the wounded place, either astringent powders or excitative ones.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for applying the cautery will prevent its return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter twenty-nine.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the root of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the divided parts and those of the mouth and between the adjusted gums, rough, black, and certain veins are blackened and made citrine or green within which the gum is seen to be corrupted and the loose teeth are decayed.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then it is necessary that you sit the patient between your knees and support their head on your thigh, and examine the teeth in which those roughnesses and causes of blackness appear, within which from them no corruption remains, and this makes the blackness and citrinity and other things to be modified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if the obstruction is in the beginning of the passage of the intestine, then it is so; and if not, then you will move the intestine over those areas on the second and third day until it comes to the last statement that you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have need of various forms of mortars and of many figures according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the razor with which the tooth is scraped from the part of the teeth is different from the razor with which it is scraped between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors must be prepared by you, whichever ones you will see are necessary:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter thirty.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you treat the tooth for its pain with all ingenuity and delay in the entire extraction of it, because there is no single cause that should hasten the evacuation of it when it is extracted, because it is a sublime substance involved in the evacuation during the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient asks that this tooth be extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because many evacuations deceive the patient and make it seem like it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this happen through operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, since you must certify what the aching tooth is, and what you know to be good, then investigate so that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth with spatulum where some virtue may be dissolved from the tooth of the gum of the entire affected part, and apply this to the teeth or to subtle forked instruments for commencement little by little until that congeals.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And apply it to the strong teeth with good speech or strong structure, and hold the head of the patient between your teeth so that you hold them firm that they do not move, and pull the tooth according to the correct technique so that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and put it under the affected part with ease and effort, facilitating the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is fractured or decayed, then investigate that you fill with thread that fracture and tighten it at the extremity of a subtle wire so that it is not broken in the hour of your construction over it, holding it firm.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And investigate that you work carefully with scraping in the circuit of the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and rend asundered part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is less than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their boasting and arrogance about the eradication of it, which they do not administer as we have recommended; because many treated cases bring great illnesses upon men, which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of them are all or some of them, or extracting that one with some bones of the jaw, as many treated cases have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the eradication of it, let the mouth be washed with six or eight tablespoons of salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is an outflow of blood because of it, as many treated cases have done, then sprinkle a certain quantity of barley and ashes on the wound, and if that barley does not work, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tongs should be subtle with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning being of long extraction, short handle and thick, so that they are not doubled when you have to operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let them be as many times thick in the handle so that when you grasp them with those they are not doubled, being short in the extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And let them be made of Indian steel decently made with extremities of teeth, and on the extremities of those let there be teeth that one goes into the other and holds by strong construction, and some treated extremities of those are in the shape of a parrot's beak, which is called ciconia, and it is said to be of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 21.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the fractured jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to eradicate a tooth that is fractured for some reason, then it is advisable that you apply a poultice on the area with warm water for a day or two until the area becomes softened; and then insert the tongs or pincers through the extremities of which are assembled at the beak of a tool called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them should be made like fine files or pincers.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey to your attempts with these forceps or pincers, then it is advisable that you make an incision on the root and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument which has the name atali, whose shape is like a small lever, the form of which is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be with a short, thick extremity, not too thin so that it doesn't break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if with that the root is excavated, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular with an extremity in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a subtle pointed extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus help yourself with this instrument having two edges, of which this is the appropriate shape for the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments that I will prescribe in the scraping of teeth; because usually it is made with this instrument which is assembled to a large nail, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular extremity twisted or short, which should be some thickness, and not be sharpened so that it is not jagged.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for the teeth are moved thus and similarly the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	More skilled and subtle artisans in the art will find for themselves, according to what it means for them the operation and various ailments; because there are some ailments for which the ancients did not design or provide a proper instrument, due to the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is jagged or fractured, then weigh and consider carefully on that location with what is convenient for the instruments and the forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help yourself with the gesture of which this is the shape:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is a small swelling in the alcune, it should be constricted or held in the mouth so that it does not burst out, and then restore the area with medicines suitable for that purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small hole in the bone, then take away that part of the decay and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of teeth that protrude over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth protrude not according to their natural body shape for them the form is faulty, and especially when it happens to women, and even more so to venerable old ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth is not close to another tooth, and there is no possible suture or ligament of it, then remove that root; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it should be made from Indian steel of extreme sharpness, like a pig's bite.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be the one with which you cut it, in several days, because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be confused or mixed with other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is an exposed protruding tooth to filing, then file it with a steel file from India of which this is the shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of iron from India and marginally; and let it be with pointed tips, just like a file, on which the teeth are sharpened little by little over many days with ease, so that there is not another tooth as hardened and hooked.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then smear that on the ends, and give it to them to chew thoroughly.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth from which a piece is broken and the tongue is wounded, then it is necessary that you smooth out the edge so that the sharpness of that fraction is removed and swallowed, and pressed down so that the tongue does not lick it nor the word be corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of damaged teeth with wire of gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the front teeth clash due to concussion and displacement by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with styptic medications, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that they do not gorge themselves on those that are strengthened with gold wire and not silver, because silver is turned green and immediately spoils, but gold in no way is changed.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the wire be of such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the method of the reception is that you take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, and then increase it with two twists of the wire between two damaged ones, or one or many, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then insert the instrument into the partition of which you began, and hold your hand with facility and wisdom inside so that it is not injured.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your grip be on that which holds the thread of the veins, so that the roots of the teeth do not get damaged.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut the superfluous extremities of the thread with the forceps or tongs, and put those in each place in gestures, and turn those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the injured tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then release that thing thus stretched like a rope.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loose or broken, hold it or them with another thread in such a manner for all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two injured teeth, thus as these things bound:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their place in their respective locations, and are re-attached thus as we have recounted, and that they heal.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And do not do this unless you are skilled and wise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And some remedies are made from the bones of a cow, and are shaped like a tooth, and are placed in the location where the tooth is lacking, and are held thus as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 94.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	About the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which comes in the tongue sometimes is natural with man, or it is accidental and happens by a wound which has already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the patient, their head existing in a raised position; and elevate their tongue, and then incise the nervous ligament according to the width by which the tongue is freed from its restraint.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knot in it, and this has come from consolidation of the wound, then you apply oil and cut through the width by which you have previously incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And beware that there not be made a fissure in the press of the flesh and that you do not cut into the artery and vein, causing a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then let the remains of the incision be washed with vinegar or green wine or cold water; and then apply a poultice on the tongue; this is a remedy which holds the patient's tongue in each night so that another knot does not form.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	More often if there is an excess of blood, put a bandage on the affected area with triturated vertirol; more often if the blood comes out, then cauterize the area with a cautery iron that suits the condition.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other remedies according to what is suitable for healing.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter thirty-five.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Certain growths occur on the tongue with an abscess resembling a small lump, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and it is enlarged to the point where it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth widely in front of a candle and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of a dark or black color, hard, to which the patient has no sensation, then do not touch that part which is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it declines to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then put the instrument on it, and cut it with a subtle spatula, and cut all around; and if blood comes out during your operation, then apply above it a bandage triturated with vertirol, so that the blood is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to the work you have begun with the patient, after having treated them with a complement of vinegar and salt; and cure that with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter thirty-six.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from behind the ears and of that which is born in the throat and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When there is a swelling in the throat, these are glands that have gathered together, which previously were hidden and are called the ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron because of the flow of blood; let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will treat it, or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what should be pierced.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already been treated with a completed or incomplete treatment; and then make the patient sit down, and their head be in a high place, and open the mouth of theirs, and a servant holding between their hands the tongue of theirs, and prepare an instrument of noble metal, of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	Let it be made of silver or iron, and let it be subtle as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you press on that tongue and the abscess is shown to you, and you cut above that bad vein, then take eleven and put it in the amulet, and pull it towards the outside parts as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you will remove from some cause of the tunics, and then cut with an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is assembled with forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of them is in the end of the other, with sharp points, which should be of iron and sharp.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut it with a spatula of which this is the shape of it: let one side be sharp, and not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut one side, cut the other according to this same method of cutting, and then give the patient a gargle of cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is an efflux of blood, gargle with water from the decoction of seeds of millet or of leaves of mint and similar to that for the causes styptic, so that the flow of blood is restrained, and then treat it so that it becomes healthy.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases, the swelling appears on the other knee or other places, and incisions are made according to what was said and written in the description of the treatment of gout.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And already a woman was treated for an abscess that had formed on her knee, the abscess was of a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed her knee, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had been warned that she would be near death if she stayed in this state for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already pushed so much that it had made two openings between which the pus flowed out through two holes.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I made an incision in the form of a fistula and placed it in one of the holes, and pulled it out, and a large amount of pus came out, and then I made an incision to comprehend the other hole, and then I forced open its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the hole in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut out a large part of it, and not much blood flowed from it except for a little.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So the knee of that woman was absolved, and she began to drink water, and then took a diet, so I didn't need to make many incisions on that abscess for a long time, and another abscess succeeded in its place, which was prolonged by the incision that was made.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you should put a hot iron and cauterize the patient's ankle, then anoint with medication; and then you should walk around and not let anyone know that God has helped with this treatment.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the incision of the uvea when it is inflamed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When there is a flow of mucus to the uvea, and it is inflamed and prolonged, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	More often when it is cured with the treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and do not confuse your cure, and also many times that the aposteme is hidden and subtle, then beware that you cut into the round aggregated; and if it is to its length, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and does not belong to him, then beware that you touch the incision of it, for in it there is fear regarding the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the method that you have been told of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press the tongue with an instrument which shapes its form and then put the nail in the new moon, and pull it downwards and cut it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of the two lips.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And beware that you do not insert anything except what is adjusted according to the natural term of the disease, for if you insert into the patient's urine, it will reveal the disease's speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then the insertion, use for that which we have recommended in the insertion of two claws, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by the insertion, beware that you use ingenuity in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manipulation of the cautery on it is not but with sharp water, and it is that you hold the head of the patient in your teeth, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have mentioned, and then take from the water which we have spoken of in the chapter on cauterization, and congeal this living cause, and pour this not thick nor subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of the cavity in which the medicine is poured be like the cavity of a scorpion's tail, and pour the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient will spit over the shoulder so that saliva or mucus from their mouth comes out for the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from that same cause into the throat of the patient and that it will spit out.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then put your hand on the medicine, and express that onto the uvula for half an hour until it becomes negated and soothed by the absorption of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the vein, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the vein into the cloth in a pipe until the cloth adheres to it, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the vein, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you indicate that the medicine should be repeated, repeat it, and then the cauterization is applied to the circuit of the vein with cloth dipped in emollient, and clean what is in the circuit of the vein from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat the wound with an embrocation, and heal by gargling until it is sanitized.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of cure is more safe than incision and less fearful.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Certain times the uvula is cured with something that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take calament, ysop, origanum, rue, arabic scammony, camomile, and similar to those of herbs, and mix all these causes, or some of them, into a wool, and let them be submerged in vinegar and boiled; and the wool should be washed decently, and there should be in the middle of the wool a pipe, on which an instrument made of silver or metal is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or metal.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula on the tonsil, until the uvula is sufficiently moistened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then spread it over those moistened places until it's dry, and beware that you don't perform this treatment at the onset of an abscess, for it would be too severe on the abscess, and it's not suitable for you to do this, but rather you should declare the abscess of the patient.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not at your present, then take a cane and place a knot in the extremity of it, so that the mouth of the patient is obstructed, for the knot of the cane prevents the vapor from reaching the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres to the gullet and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Moistened places have adherence to the gullet or foot spine or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore it is necessary that you extract that which is apparent from those things, on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument between the teeth, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if that which does not appear is hidden in the throat, then make the patient vomit by inducing them to drink a concoction to purge their stomach, because the cause of the obstruction in the throat will be expelled through vomiting; or give the patient a piece of soap made from nap or root of laytuga or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it strongly with a thread, and give it to the patient to swallow, so that when it reaches the place where the obstruction is located, it will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take a cord and tie it strongly around the arm, and let it be left there for a while and then removed; or take a tube and insert it into the bladder and leave it in for a time.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if not expelled by these means that we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in the following form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be thick enough to fit a small rod, and at its end have a cavity which you insert into the throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the patient's chin upwards, and beware lest the bone of the throat or jaw touch, so that it does not injure the bone or spine, or that the doctor puts their hand on it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	More than the emperor, the disease that is hidden within is revealed by the knowledge of the place of the cause and the surrounding area, and pulls the hand with the instrument on it, all according to the quantity that has been prepared beforehand so that it can be extracted.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of blood associated with the knee.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the knee is treated with medicine as we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not with confectures, consider then on the knee of the patient to the sun, since you have compressed the tongue of it with an instrument that you have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the blood vessel, extract it with a small tool or with subtle gestures decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the knee of the patient, and put in the cavity of the cannula an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the blood vessel is dead and removed from the knee) and abstain the patient from water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a full vessel of cold water, and put the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow any of this cause, but hold the water for an hour with your hand, because the blood vessel feels the water most when it is at rest.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	More often if the patient is not previously prepared with what we have recommended, then subject the patient to a mixture of cypress or absinthe through the instrument that we have recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Make this, then in four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And there is another manner of operation in the suffumigation of that, which you take a bowl in which are ignited coals and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a hole, and the extremity of the instrument is composed in that hole; and apply it from below to the suffumigation; and put the patient's mouth on the extremity of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not expelled until you know that the suffumigation has reached the blood, because the blood then will discharge.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not descend, then repeat the suffumigation many times, and restrain the patient from drinking, and have them eat salty and bitter foods, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that with this treatment the suffumigation be expelled.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood of the throat is treated when it is visible; and it resembles a pair of pincers thus many times, except that it is in the alcove curved:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed in the groin area, and the extremity of it resembles a beak of a stork, that is called gout, in which there is an accumulation of lime, for this reason, when we press any cause, it does not release.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which there is the sum of the serum in collection of abscesses and in section of their discharge.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The abscesses are moved with special treatments, with various methods, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in perforation and discharge of them through two methods, of which one is for the species of abscesses in themselves being treated; and for that which we press out of the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is proper for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that happens in the head is different from the abscess that happens in the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy place is different from the abscess in the joint; and each of them is judged by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more of the abscesses are such that it is preferable that they not be perforated but rather have maturation of the blood in them or completion of it.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other abscesses which are supposed to be pierced when they are ripe, and not matured according to their completion, just like abscesses that are applied to the joints, for an abscess that is near a joint, its being from it is prolonged until it reaches the purulent matter that is in the circuit of it, and for this reason the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, by which it is made cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess proper to a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured near the principal member; or it is proper to the anus, therefore perforate the unripe one; and it is not necessary to pierce the raw, undigested one, but only that which is proper to the anus, so that it does not press the rectum of it and is elongated to the parts divided from the anus, and a fistula is made, or that which is made in the term of it which is not sanated.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and also it is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is matured when there is a decrease in pain and a cessation of fever, and also a reduction in swelling and in pulse, and a sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And where there is a cavity, you should know that the perforation creates a hole in the place of the abscess and of the pus coming from the treatment of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation should be done through the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or of the feet, and in the place of the veins, of the nerve cords, of the arteries; and, finally, in all hidden places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to delay the perforation until digestion is confirmed according to the humor, as we have said; because if you perforate then, it prolongs the body of the pus and of foul matter, and forces out the lips of the wound which become hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be perforated according to the width of the flesh or of the body as necessity dictates, or according to that which the affected member indicates.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer small perforations, and in large abscesses a large and wide perforation or several incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other times the apostemas are in those places where it is necessary that the abscess be opened and drained, when it is made thus as a poultice and made in term that has already suppurated, thus like that which falls into drops of pus and boils.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are cut with a section having three angles; and of those it is in which is incised thus as the figure of a leaf of mint, thus like the apostemas of the anginas.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them it is in those where a round section and a crescent-shaped section are administered, and similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More, that one which is not capable thus as are the superficial abscesses of the lion, where you should make a superficial perforation, or plane only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And where the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you should perforate it and not be concerned that you extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted from it a portion, and then apply a plaster to the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger portion, and then make many evacuations according to the degree to which it is evacuated.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit is greatly resolved with the egress of the pus, and hardly dies the patient, and you operate them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Keep this chapter with great caution, and return your attention to the perforation in which you will make an incision, considering that you will clean the wounds and see if the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat cut, then you administer remedies of oil or anti-inflammatory ointment; and if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the perforation are many, then consider that you put a dressing on each wound so that they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the skin is separated or has formed a cavity, then consider that you fill it with a lot of soft cloth or yarn made from linen thread, as when you treat wounds or roots, its humidity; and apply this for three days; and then remove it and cure the area with what is necessary to heal the injuries.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is an outflow of blood during the time of your operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in which you soak a linen cloth, and place it over the area of the profusely bleeding wounds.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then consider that you administer treatment and cure with powders which have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	More so if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of nervous movements, then it is good that you apply poultices made with wine and oil, and put them on those areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then it is good that you apply poultices soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that is applied should be cooled so that it is the third day, as we have said, and then it is good that you lance the abscess and cleanse it and administer to it the cure that is convenient for it.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the way of distinction I have already spoken of all abscesses in whatever manner is the way of the cure of them by chapters singularly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter twelve.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the nape of the neck small abscesses form, and they are species of knots that contain tunics that are adherent to them; and the species of them are movable.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And some of them are cysts, and of those there are ones that contain humidity resembling slime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those which contain moisture similar to dust, and gather it; and of those which are muddy, rough.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since you must not make the extraction of those cause irritation to the arteries.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you squeeze those with an instrument the shape of which goes near to them, which is called entromes, so that you know what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then separate it in section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin in the section from line B to line G. Then when the moisture is evacuated, then you excise that which contains the moisture, and do not leave any of that cause of all, for if many times seen it returns, if it remains from that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge the cot (knot or wound) in Egyptian gum, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and let it be until another day, for the corrosion of all that is made from that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply on that wound the Egyptian gum secondly and thirdly if it is indicated for it, until you are confident that no longer is any cause of that membrane; then cure the wound with gum until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess with fatty nodes, then you insert the needle in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I have made an incision in the shape of a cross, and placed forceps between the two lips of the incision and scraped out the entire affected area, and exerted my virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	More often if your bowels make counter-pressure, then do what you have previously recounted as primary.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the abscess of incision and cure according to what you have said; and an incision over a fatty abscess is considered lighter, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And some times there are abscesses in the head of some men in whom there is absolutely no humidity; the cause of which is that I have incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess to be hard, rough, white, and dull, which could not be drained, and if I had struck it with a pustule, it would have burst.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other accidental abscesses on the head this is not the chapter, such as the abscesses that come to the heads of infants and from the roots of the ears, but the incision of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	Stop the flow of those things from the lowest part of their body so that the body of the blood is alleviated to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And properly treat those with what is convenient for that cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times we have seen these apostems appear in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin area; and some times they occur in the other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and many are engendered between them, and all of these scrofulas have their own proper tunic, and just as with the nodes and apostems of the head, just as we have recommended.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are many, for some of them are gouty, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you find with good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the codena, and it is moved to all part, and it is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not deep, so that you make an incision with a superficial scalpel from the upper part to the lower part of the body of the line G to the line B, and cut that entire part, and stretch two lips of the codena to one ounce, or to many ounces if you have need of them, just as we have said in the apostems of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	It is of greater caution that the vein or nerve is not injured.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be pointed, so it does not injure your hand with incision, or disturb the patient, and only incise what is necessary to incise; for if you were to incise a vein or artery and prohibited from your operation, then apply on the wound some powdered vitriol or other powders which stop flux of blood, and tighten the wound, and let that which has been rested relieve the acidity of the aposteme and be softened the wound and begin to be purged.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is separated.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation which you have begun.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then investigate with your finger if there is a rupture of any of the other small scrofula, therefore incise those and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is in the root of the scrofula a large vein, beware that you do not incise that scrofula from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Be careful that you tie it with a strong and doubled thread, and that you leave it so that it falls by itself without hindrance.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old oil which you have already mixed with Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out the entire scrophula, then it is necessary that you adjust the edges of the wound and cauterize as much pus as possible so that no excess remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that excess has remained due to the size of the scrofula, it is necessary that you understand how to cut out the root of that, and extract it, and apply a suture, which is what is called.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation where it appears to you the place of maturation, and stop the perforation of that which is the lowest pus of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then apply a perforation, heat up a plaster and apply it to those areas, so that it cuts away the rotten part of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound is already cleaned, then treat it with a plaster of generated flesh so that it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the pill of the aposteme, accidentally taken by the apothecary.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients said that this section was in the pill, and it was not seen by any man in our land that this had been done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More often in men there is a tendency to avoid the extraction of the stone, since it is not done gently, for which all the veins and main [blood vessels] of the patient are affected.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses or cuts in the mouth or throat or two ears, when the illness is not in the cane, it is advisable to use the section of the stone to flee the loss which is made by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore it is advisable when we want to make an incision, that we cut the stone with three circles of the stone's circles, or four with a small section for the width in the one that is between two circles by quantity, so that the incision is in the cartilage-free area, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for incision, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of blood from it are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is advisable that he extends the ligature of the throat with an onion, and then ties the ligature so that it comes to the canal, but avoids the blood vessels if any of them are visible for some reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then incise the kidney as we have recommended; and it is indicated on the section of the canal by the weakness which is of that exit with what is of its disruption and by the abscessation of the mouth.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Elevate the wound that has been opened for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Then when the hour is reached in which the perforation is feared, apply two lips of the gauze to the edge of the wound, and sew only that with the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended is not an exposition but rather to show that some of these apostems have already oppressed the throat of the patient, and the patient has come near death, and his life is in between, and some are about to obstruct the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the place of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore I command to leave the open wound until the evil of the disease is consumed; and its evil lasts for three days; and then I command to dress the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And this that I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and put it in the throat and cut out a part of the vein of the lung, and I was called to its cure, and I touched the mucus as it is customary for the dead, and I uncovered the wound and I found the blood which had come out of the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it was confessed that a vein or ligament had not been injured, and the wound was from the plague, and they cured it before the focus became infected.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not hasten to serve if it does not arrive at the desired time, and then return after some days to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the removal of the splinter there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the incision regarding the aposthema which occurs in the throat before, and it is called throat hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apostema called throat hernia is a large aposthema according to the body's coloring, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is said in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And the natural one is not worthy of a cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is said in two ways, of which one is similar to fat knots, and the other way is similar to an aposthema which is made by knotting of an artery, and in that one there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it does not happen that a presumption is made to him with an iron except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that and investigate it with the said, and if you find something similar to fat knots, and it is not suspended on any of the veins, then you cut it in the same way as the knots, and extract it from what contains the pus and abscess; and if not, then all the blood is pressed out, and then treat the place with what is suitable for a cure until it becomes healthy.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter twelve.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section of the species of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the knots, many species and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And I recommend that you recount thus the difference between a knot and an abscess with certain doubtlessness.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that with an abscess there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the surplus is sedated; and it is a completed putrefaction which then ceases the fever, the pain and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a knot there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that pus which is in its own sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cyst and is made thus as a vacuity, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, which are either fat or contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore I say, when you come to the cure of a knot, that you expel that and inquire into its beginning with an instrument which is called an intrument, as will be seen in the chapter which is next.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of inquiry into abscesses and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the humid place which you find in the abscess, and you will turn the threads of the needle little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the kernel.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then put your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and extract the entrails and consider what is coming out from the remains of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the flowing humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you dry it with a superficial drying according to what has been said about other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the remains of the entrails there is no humidity, then you should know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry on it with drying having the shape of a cross according to this shape:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	thus as you have been taught, and suspend that which is excessive, and scratch the crust from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack, if you can, over that and extract that blood from the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that blood, and many times it happens that this occurs, and then you extract it by pieces until none of it remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if some of it remains for any reason, a little or too much, the knot returns according to the worse.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and apply a cauterized dressing on the area where the abscess was, and cure that with another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large knot, then kiss the patient's lips and cure that which grows in the flesh.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the pulse is rapid in the patient, or slow, then touch and fill the place of the third finger with a poultice made from vitriol and apply it for two or three days until the plague disappears and the swelling of the blood subsides; and then return to cut away that which is rotten from the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the introducers, and they are of three species, one is large, one is medium, and one is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introducer is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium introducer is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introducer is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Made of iron, of awl-file, with well-sharpened extremities, so that they make a good instrument for the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are named after their inventors, and one of them is called Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	It is from three species, of which one is great, another medium, and the third small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of the great experience, the form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of the middle experience, the form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of the small experience, the form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is suitable that they are for those abscesses and exits and fistulas and boils, so that among them there are some of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made from threads, thick, of flax, or of wool, as with large needles on which the silks are sewn, and they are made of copper wire, or of iron, or of silver, And the best ones are those made of copper wire.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made from black lead, which is suited for those such that the fistulas in the cavity of which there are reflections, are reflected with their lightness to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And it is from three species, of which some are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the quantity of the size of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the large plaster.
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the medium plaster.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of a small lead experience or possibly "Form of a tiny piece of lead" or more likely in a
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the ankles are of special motives, for some of them are simple ulcers, to which there is only a curvature, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their ankles are orphaned or dropped, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those which are ankles having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them there are some that have three curvatures, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all those things are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple ankle, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a medium simple ankle:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple ankle, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large dropped ankle.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a medium dropped ankle, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small dropped ankle, shape of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large ankle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium ankle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small ankle having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large ankle having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an ankle joint having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a foot with three joints:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and the abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, one of which is large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Shape of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and not placed in such a manner, but rather so that it can be done gently in the scraping of the nodes, the fear of incision of a vein or of a nerve, and for this reason the patient is comforted and regains tranquility for a little while, which they obtain from the excoriacion of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the emollients, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of a large poultice:
Forma de magda migier:	Shape of the medium poultice:
Forma de magda pauc:	Shape of the small poultice:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of wool and resemble a net in which something is sifted.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the outer layer of the skin where the pointed cautery is hidden and in that area the parts are divided and defined, when you wish, thus as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of swellings, which are hidden between the fingers due to the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceptibly affect the patients, are of three species: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those things:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of tumors in which the flow of blood is diverted, and they are of three species: large, medium and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of yellow wax, round with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is seen that these species of tumors are yours, large, medium and small, because through them the flow of blood is diverted with speed when necessary, and then when at first it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to divert blood in every part of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, such as in the joints of the legs and thighs, and in the joints of the arms, and on the breasts and belly and groin, and similar to these fleshy and humid joints.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And certain surgical procedures are made with those small instruments, others resembling scissors or forceps, according to this form; through which the blood is separated when it is done by venesection, or by incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And certain surgical procedures are made roundly according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Certain men have swollen breasts which are caused by excessive sleep and poor diet, and as a result their breasts become swollen and similar to women's, and it is considered shameful.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to the one who has this condition, it is necessary to make an incision on the breast in the lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then remove all the excess flesh, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and sew the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and heal the one inside until they are cured.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast declines to the sides and is softened by its size, similar to that of women, then it should be divided into two parts, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, each one contained in the other up to the end of each, so that the larger section contains the smaller one according to this form, from line B to line G. And then remove the flesh that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the excess fat, and administer what we have said about the stitches and powders, whatever is necessary for the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what must be cut due to the anxiety of the patient, and because of an outflow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a submersed plaster in a corrosive ointment and lay on that which corrodes the rot of the fracture, and properly cure that which is affected by the disease.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses that come out at the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come out at the nipple are of the species of scrofula, and tumors, which contain a skin that is sacred.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity it is necessary to cut with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill the wound with a warm poultice and apply it to the other side.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then let the wound be dressed and treated with a suitable ointment for that, so that it may be healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of knots and of scrofula, then you should proceed as we have said in the section concerning scrofula treatments.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	When the wound has grown so large that it becomes putrid, then administer to him the cautery as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of abscesses that occur by acridity or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery is broken, and the vein is consolidated which is above it, then putrid abscesses are suspected, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscesses are from the artery or from the vein: for when an abscess is from the artery it is long and accumulated in the thorax of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the vein.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from the vein is round at the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And a section about this abscess is an error, especially in that which is near the shoulders, and in the armpits, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very bad, therefore it is necessary that its treatment be avoided with iron, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, it is necessary that it be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about that which is from the flow due to inflammation of the arterial orifice, incision in the vein section in the long; and then make an incision with knives and then reveal the artery, and removal of the tunics until it be discovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put the needle on that thread and make it penetrate between the other sides, and tighten the ligature with double fidelity in two places, — which causes you to extract the excess humors from the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then touch the place which is between two ligaments with spatula so that the blood comes out from it, and let the abscess be dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer the cure in which pus is generated until the ligaments fall; and treat that with a suitable ointment for that, so that it will be healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to a cut vein, then take care that you hold with your hand the thing that is nearest to the abscess on the side of the body, and put the needle in the place where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and let it be in the double thread by which you extract from one side, and tie the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you in the ligature of the uva, on two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will be extracted, then put the thread in the needle before all the abscess goes out of the first incision, and tighten the threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in the middle place of the entry that when it comes out what is in it, afterwards you cut the excess of the quiver, and let out what is bound to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice on it that has been submerged in wine and oil, and administer the cure that is made with warm compresses and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter one of the abscess which occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus as the abscess occurs in the artery and in the vein, similarly the abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs due to their percussion or when it occurs from excessive effort, and from similarities.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made worse by it in the places of the joints or of the ankle, or in any place where the articulations are flexed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the worst of its conditions six of them and when it is constrained with inflammation, it seems to the patient similar to stupidity.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that gathers in the front of the body, and for this reason the quiver is applied, and it is increased on one side and does not go to the sides either from the front or from the back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is not suitable for those who have joint pain to be treated with iron, because the treatment would cause a strong contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Pain in the head or forehead is treated with a plaster.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a mild abscess, then apply warmth and separate that which is putrid from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excavate that, and apply an ointment to that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of abscesses that occur in the spleen which occur near the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	We find in some men fatty growths in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those that have spleens which are called fungal due to similarity with fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head is thick; and already the lips of those are turned, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in the belly of it there were two spleens which were more similar to fungal growths, and there was no difference between those whites, of minimal root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inward and were split, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I inserted a probe into them and inserted one in the foot with eighteen threads, and another with six threads.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation on the incision of them is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you insert a spatula in the wound, and have cauteries in the focus, for four to six times the section of it will expel its humor; and if the humor comes out, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is pale and fearful, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a piece of fresh lead, and apply it to that tissue, the handling of which is what we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the constriction of the thread of lead; thus, do not cease to apply the large lead plaster on the tissue, until it is absorbed and falls off by itself with its own effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the tissue is of coarse root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you must incise the mattress of them, and then cauterize that which does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then heal that which is inside so that the wound may be healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not attempt to incise the one which is of dark color, of little feeling, of light regard, for that is a cancerous abscess.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come to the memory of the sick person with a remedy afterwards.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter twelve.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of the swelling of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Swelling of the navel is caused by many reasons; either by fissures of the ciphac which is above the belly, and from it the tissue or intestine protrudes according to the other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as it has been said before, or by constricted inflammation within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the ciphac and by protrusion of the tissue, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is less painful, and then appears with diverse symptoms.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that with it is what we have recounted before, of much more violent diversity, and when you press on that with your fingers it is hidden, and then returns; and it is foul-smelling and it is magnified by many movements of vomiting and violent turmoil.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	More often because of humidity, it is evident and not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it believed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with this symptom the abscess appears on the declining blackish area.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	More often if it is from flesh alone, then the abscess is serious, thick and hard, and the liver is affected according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	More often if it is due to flatulence, then the touch on him is evident.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on him is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the liver, or of a vein, or from flatulence; then beware that you are prohibited from the cure of it, for in that there is fear and dread, as it is taught to you in the chapter in which I have spoken about the abscesses from the liver and from a vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or from the membrane, then beware that you order the patient to hold his legs up, and be standing stretched out; and then sew with a thread around the entire navel, and then order him to stand bent between your hands on his back, and then circle with a spatula flat in the area of the navel over the place where you have sewn with the thread; and then stretch the majority of the abscess to the lower parts down with a large needle; and then tie in the area with a strong or thin thread and the handle of the thread decently.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then return the edge of the abscess that is extended over the ligament and introduce the mentioned tool into that indicated place and search for the intestine; and if you have found or guarded it by the ligament, then extract it carefully and push the intestine to the divided parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, then take it with a pinch; and cut away the excesses of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is opposite to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and introduce two needles in the circle you have made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, which should penetrate; and then tie the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area where the extended flesh may scab over and fall by itself; or cut away what becomes thin and falls off, and then treat that wound with a poultice that is suitable for the ulcers until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the elevation of the navel is due to nothing but flesh or humidity, then it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then treat it with a suitable remedy that consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter three.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner it is via to the cure of it with medicine, and that it is necessary in the cure to use iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And they said that the ancients that some excavated cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus like those on the breast or in the thigh and its similar members allocated to extract all that, and especially when it is commencing small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	More when it is ancient and grave, it is not good that you appropriate it for yourself, because I have not been able to heal from that or any other, nor have I seen anyone else who has succeeded in this.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you should precede and prepare the patient and purge them of black bile, some excavated cancers, and then apply a sponge to that, if it is an atrabiated or manifest plethora.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparation in which it is located for operation, and then prohibit on the trunk certain things that are suitable for this; and then concave all parts of the body so that there is a good purging between them so that no cause of the roots of it remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow, and do not stop that purging, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument, whichever is most convenient of the available instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you find opposition from thick blood due to an incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that which stops the flow of blood, and immediately treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter five.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, the species of dropsy and their symptoms, and the treatment of them with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of altitudes alone, and it is not close to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hyposarca, because that is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of dropsy called tympanites with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already achieved debility, or if there is another illness besides this dropsy, such as if it is in the chest or belly and similar to these, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, for fear is about that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you see that the patient has an excess of vertut, and it is not another disease but rather just dropsy, and they are neither infant nor elderly, then the manner of the operation is that you raise the patient between your hands, and place your hand on the navel of theirs with your thumb, injecting water into the part of the intestine, and apply a spinal plaster according to this method:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp parts, with a pointed extremity like a plaster; but however it should be brief in the patient's alcove, little by little, so that during the operation you do not enter into the intestine, and that you release that one.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider if the generation of dropsy is from the part of the intestines, for it is necessary that you cut with the section near the navel for the quantity of three fingers to the lower parts, on the right side of theirs above the intestine.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your cut should be on the left of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the bladder, then your cut should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not suitable that your section be on the side where you want to treat the patient for which the excesses do not flow to that cold location.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then properly perforate the entire tube with the instrument, and insert it into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the tube and the siphon, and you will extract that; and if the quantity is of a fingernail or around it.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then properly perforate the siphon so that the spatula reaches the empty location, which is the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or tinned iron, on which in the lower part there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other; and the end of it is shaped like the feather of a pen, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the uppermost end of it there is a handle, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that water rises above the instrument, thus evacuating from the water to the mouth the same quantity, because if you evacuate more than what is suitable in an hour, it can kill the patient due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or bring on them the quintessence which is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Purge that quantity of the virtues of it according to what the disposition of the patient indicates regarding the virtue of its pulse and its goodness.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and hold back the water which causes it to be so retained by the coding, which holds the tube that is on the navel of which it is recommended to you that you perform in that manner according to that method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then insert the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and extract from the water a small quantity, and do this for several days without fear, and beware of error lest not much of the water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and a large quantity of water is released, then treat that one as if in a warm sand bath, and move them to a warm bath, and have them wait under the sun for a long time; and treat them with desiccative medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the middle and the liver after the extraction of the water, as it has been recounted to you in what has preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 54 or Chapter LV (55), possibly
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose urine holes are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some infants are born with a hole in their mother's womb and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or is tightly closed or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, we must consider the perforation of it as soon as it is born with subtle movement according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then stop up the hole with a thin lead clip and tie it, and keep it for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate it should be uncovered and urine allowed to flow; and then cover it again.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the flow with lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not close the opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	More, that which has a tight hole should be treated with a lead clip, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the hole is not in its place, are deformed, for which reason there are some who are born with the hole of the penis at the end of the head of the member, so that they cannot urinate properly, until they lift the member to their mother's parts above; and it is not due to generation, because the sperm cannot reach the womb according to nature, and it is a very bad disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on them is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with vehement extraction, and make an incision at the head of the penis at the place of the perineum with a sharp spatula, as if it were an incision of a feather, or so that you do not touch any part, so that the middle of the vein seems like the head of the penis and the tract falls in the middle place according to need.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And beware that in your operation of blood flow, many things can go wrong; and be careful with them that you abscess the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 6.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the treatment for what is done on the prepuce at the head of the penis and of the corruption and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this treatment is done on the penis and it is an excess of flesh growth.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend with a thin thread and cut that out until it all falls off; and then apply a poultice of submirgit, an Egyptian ointment, on the affected area; and then, treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ulcer is malignant, with a bad color, then it is advisable that you apply cautery near the edge of it and the root of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Moreover if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then it is advisable that you remove the ulcer that is inside first until it is healed; and then you treat the outside one, because when you treat both at the same time, it is not certain that it will not be painful.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And also examine the genital area and the blackened and corrupted foreskin, then it is advisable that you remove all that which is already decayed and that which is about to rot or has already rotted; and apply a liniment on that area made with honey, which is mixed with flour of wheat and of crushed and ground herbs.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat the one with the other cure until it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Moreover if there is an abundance of bloody flux, then administer lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	for juvenile cautery is of two dispositions at the same time, one is for the flux of blood and the other is for the wound when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed entirely at that time, then it is necessary that you insert into the middle of the foreskin a lead tube so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is its own, and for whom circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary that you scrape away the spatula until it is dissolved, the ligament is broken, and the head of the penis is freed from all that binds it.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish them thoroughly, then it is necessary that you scrape with the spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it happens that the foreskin, when it is subtle, is perforated by its subtlety effortlessly.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a subtle instrument, which has been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be treated with a strict styptic so that it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 48.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and the treatment of that which occurs to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity problems: however, since it is of our operation and will, and its results are especially in children, it is necessary that we assign the best operation and way to lose weight to achieve health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Thus, I say that the ancients did not recommend circumcision for their free men, because they didn't use it in their laws, and it's not because we have acquired it through experience, which is why most of the artisans and barbers have found that using circumcision and purification with a new knife and with tongs; and they use ligatures with thread and with needle.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already forbidden all these methods and I do not find better purification with the fork, with ligature or with thread than purification with the nail, because many times the skin escapes from above, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and one layer is removed, and for the other it is necessary to make another incision and painful stitching.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the purification that is done by the barbers, and it's digital, which the surgeons use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secured, because the foreskin enters into the hole of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	More in the operation on the nail, the iron instrument breaks and corrupts the entire operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the child's bowel is short by nature, and many times seen in such a manner that there is no need for modification, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More from the modification that is done with sutures and ligaments of the vein, the goodness, experiment reveals to me, that the sutures are of proportional incision, because the sharpness that is above is as the sharpness that is below; and thus when you press your hand proportionally on both sharps, and incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the vein in a figure containing the intestine of the entire affected part, with which there is no error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you should make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, that you should not do but rather you put the vein on its thigh only so much, and that you lift it up into the other day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do this cheering in all that manner which is at your possibility, according to what receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then be between your hands, prepared and upright, and do not let it be seen; and hide the sutures in your hand or place them under your foot, so that the child does not see those nor any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then insert your hand into the patient's vagina and blow into the womb, and pull out what is stuck in the neck of the womb, and immediately cleanse that which has accumulated there due to rot.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then tie the tied place with a double thread, and tie below that one a small second ligature, and you hold the aforementioned threads and tighten the area of the ligature with good retention, and insert between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then lift the womb upwards and extract the head of the vagina; and slowly pour a small amount of liquid, because it is better; and sprinkle powder above and on the powder place a cloth in which has been infused mugwort mixed with oil and rosewater made recently; and lay that on top for another day; and treat that with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the purging instruments for cleansing, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some of the extremities are not-cut and the others are cut, so that the branch of the nail is not visible, and the length of the two fingers is as the length of two wrists together.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The greatest mistake in cleansing is when you strongly pull out the entire womb or part of it through the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is advisable that you extend your finger from your hand against the abscess of the place and that you press according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and press it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed, and the matter that is inflated under the infected wound has not been discharged, then let it be that the aposteme is cut with caution, and excavate it with facility, and press it according to what you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And beware of the head of the wound, lest it become worse for him.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore, treat it with the same remedy that consolidates the wound from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is pressed on the bowel excessively, and the parts are separated from each other, this does not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And thus treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by polypus or by flesh, and it resembles those things that we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and there is retention of the substance in the body due to a stone that is already in the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the feet of that one on the back of another and stretch out the belly of the affected part as much as possible from the back, and the patient should tighten their grip as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore the neck of the bladder is constricted to expel the stone to the back parts, so that the urine is absorbed.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with the water that we have mentioned, then the cause is violently made on the patient, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction of it with an instrument that is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and the tube should be subtle, like a feather quill, or a reed cane in subtlety of a long straw, similar to half a palm, on which there is a subtle hole at the end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the handling of the injection of urine with it is that you take the thread doubled and tie it at the extremity of the wool or cloth for a good ligature; and insert the extremities of the thread into the back part of the syringe, and cut with scissors if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, but insert more into the tube violently. And then attach the syringe to the vein and to the humerus.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	Make the patient lie on their side, and wrap the bladder of theirs and the rod with towels or cloths, and anoint them with olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the sound into the facilitation so that it reaches to the root of the rod; and then double the rod upwards towards the division of the navel; and then press the sound inside that; and then press that until it reaches the bladder, and that makes the patient be reached by the desired cause, and it is not done thus according to this order, but as the case goes to tortuousness.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then stretch the vein with the wool slowly, so that the urine touches the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and do for the cure of urine, and use a sound, do not cease doing that and use a sound until the bladder is evacuated and the patient receives relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 49.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of injection into the bladder through a funnel and similar instruments which are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is obstructed by pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it should be done with an instrument which is called a funnel, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But rather that in the extremity of it, it is numb, and thus closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that one there are three holes: two from one side, as many times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is that which is injected, and it is according to the quantity that oppresses that one, until when some cause is pulled from the humidity, it is pulled, and when it is expelled, with it being pulled, and when it is expelled for a long time, according as it makes clampcedra, with which naphta is fixed in the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore when you want to project humidity in the bladder, insert the extremity of clampcedra into the humidity, and pull with it that which is injected to the lower parts, so that the humidity is pulled into the cavity of clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of clampcedra into the rod according to what we have recommended in the circling; and then inject the humidity with that which you inject, so that that humidity reaches the bladder as much as possible, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the subtle bladder channel in which the bladder is channeled, and this is the shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And let it be made of silver or of gold, from which the head is formed in a manner similar to a small plum, and give them the cane with a gentle handle.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take the bladder of motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and bind it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and evaporate that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the extremity of the crystalizer into the rod.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then tighten your hand over the bladder with the humidity and strict structure, so that it enters into the patient's sense that the humidity has already passed into the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present to you, then take a piece of bladder membrane and make a circle from it; and perforate that with all its thickness; and then insert a strong thread into those channels, so that they are turned inside out; and then tie the circle in such a way that it is tied also by the fascia, because you put in that water that you want to drain, along with the humors and liquids.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that to the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand that the humidity enters into the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter Twelve
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken in the division of the species of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and its symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said which stone requires surgical operation on it, and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that one which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now narrate to him with clear explanation and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly goes to children; and of its symptoms is that the urine which is excreted from the bladder seems like water in its thinness, and sand appears in it; and the patient rubs his penis, and many times a thread comes out, and then it is dressed; and with this he has pain in the anus, in many of these cases.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is rare for children under fourteen years to achieve healing; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people, it is moderate because that is between the two.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And concerning one whose stone is larger and the cure is easier; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this, it is advisable at the beginning to cleanse the patient with a crucible which draws out all the wound which is in their intestines; because this wound, by certain prohibitions, prevents the penetration of the medicine into the intestine.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then take hold of the patient with their feet elevated and constricted, and massage them in such a way that the medicine descends to the pressure of the bladder, or jumps from one place to another certain times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that which is prepared between your hands, and the hands of the patient are placed on their hips, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then massage thoroughly that and the entire affected area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the medicine in the space, then you will be satisfied as long as it is dry on them.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it does not touch all of the thigh, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil the inner side of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the right hand if they are a young adult, and insert this into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And massage the medicine until it reaches inside where your finger touches.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Turn that small one little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And press firmly on that with the aforementioned tool, and extract it from the divided parts before the area where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant with their right hand to pull apart the thighs to the divided parts below, and with their other hand to hold back the cod (or intestine) which is near the thighs, away from the area where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert the spatula to make an incision of which this is the shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in it what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle place, but to the side of the left thigh; and let the incision be above that stone and the aforementioned tool be in the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the incision before is wide and the depth according to the quantity that the stone has grown to be possible, and not larger, because the tool would compress the stone which is in the anus, and it is forgotten with difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is some part of the stone to which are attached angles and margins, because the extraction of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that water, there is a tumor similar to a gland, and it is round, and it is made from the lighter excrement.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then if it is the one which has edges and margin, adjust it in the cleft.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus outwardly protruding, then you should put your hands on that, or you should bind around that with decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on which you bind to the stone, and does not escape from it; or you insert the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot operate on that, then you widen the hole a little, and if you see a flow of blood, bind it with a string treated with vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you apply the hand to the mouth of the bladder, and immediately you cut into it; and immediately you apply a little water; and similarly you do if there are many stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance is that you cut into it with a large incision, for you bring to the patient one of two causes: either death or that it impedes the flow of urine, because of which the area is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May administer expulsion of what is retained inside, or apply a poultice to the fracture in the area of the foot where it extrudes the pus in the flesh.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with poultices of aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place on it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rosated oil and cold water, so that the postema may be alleviated.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then raise the patient on their back, and do not untie the dressing for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that is untied, wash the area with water and warm oil, and then treat it with a gentle ointment called diafinicon and a special ointment called diabazilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	May it happen that in the wound an aposteme, a fever and a corrosion, occur, and it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the excretion of blood with urine), then anoint the said ointment on the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it provokes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar and water, and apply an opposite treatment to all species, according to what is convenient for the cure of the disease.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And take in the hours of all the treatment that you apply both to the thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the bladder, and is stuck in it, and urination is difficult, then treat that with what you have recommended before, because many times this treatment has been accused of causing retention; and now take a iron perforator, whose form is this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extraction, pointed, stuck in a wooden handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thread, and tie it to the bladder and to the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating with ease until the perforator reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the perforator with your hand on that small stone, little by little, and you make the perforation of it until you make the other part penetrate; because the urine is then freed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is broken from the stone of the partition of the flow of the urine, because it is pierced, and it is outside with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not suited to you for some reason that prohibits it, then apply a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then bind around the stone on that member between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then dissolve the ligament and purify the congealed blood, which is formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have a ligament of thread below the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligament above, because when the thread is dissolved, the cord immediately returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary when you tighten the thread above, that you elevate the cord to the upper parts, or that it returns to give you the suitable complement, and covers the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stone from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Pain in the women's thighs is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If pain appears in some of those areas, then the treatment of it is difficult, and it is forbidden by many manners.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is when the woman has strong thighs.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is when you do not find a woman with knowledge to describe to the doctor what is cast, or it is from women having been married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is when you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the incision near the pain in the women's thighs is far from the place of the pain, for which a deep incision is indicated, and in this there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity calls you to that, then take a woman doctor who is knowledgeable, and she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek a doctor who is skilled and subtle, or present a female midwife who is experienced in the care of women, or a woman who has a share of knowledge in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then make that one present, and command her to do all that you order her, from the examination of the pain to the beginning of treatment; which thing is that you examine if the woman is strong, then put your finger in her buttocks and touch the pain.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you take that away, cut it from the diseased part, and then command someone to write on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert the diseased part into the womb of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she will place her left hand on the bladder, and squeeze it with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you take that away, then it is good that it gradually draws the stone from the orifice of the bladder to the divisions of the urine with the sum of its virtue entering so that it comes to the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then write on that application of the matrix of the womb towards the root of the thigh from whichever part it may be to the bladder, and cut the stone in that division, so that the stone is not returned by the bladder, cutting it from the urine.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And let the section be small at the beginning; and then insert the tool into that section, and if you feel the bladder, then adjust in the section according to the quantity which you know the bladder will be emptied of it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the species of bladder stones are many: for some of them are small and large, and rough and sharp, and long and round, and having roots.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you should know how many species are of it for that which you signify about that which you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust on the spot a veterinary tourniquet and leave it for an hour until the blood is stopped, then return to your operation while the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make that you prepare for yourself the instruments which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is cut, then you apply powder on the spot and bind it with cloths and tight bandage, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because soon the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore when the flow of blood has ceased, then clean the spot, and return to your operation while the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of section concerning hernia treatment.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is nothing but an accumulation of humidity in the white drop which is behind the membrane of the genitals containing the seed, and it is called a drop.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And certain times it is in the proper pancreatic location where nature prepares it in the part of the belly, until it is said that another belly is needed; and this is the code for the genital area between the white ciphac which we have mentioned, and it is not that but tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitals, because in those with debility this matter is poured out, and sometimes it happens due to a percussion made on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it is inclining to citrine or sanguine, or red, or is black and feculent, or is whitish and watery, and that which is the worst.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known that there is this accumulation of water are these: for if it is in the white ciphac which we have mentioned, then the apostema is a little red and inclined to longitude like the figure of a belly, and the genital appears, because the humidity touches everything.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper pancreatic location, then the apostema is red at the part of the belly and by this it is estimated that there is another belly.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the genital code and the white ciphac, then it cuts off the feeling.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to recognize the color of the humidity, then you express the color of the humidity in the posthumous abscess with intertwined cartilage from which the form is preceded; and according to what is exited in the vestiges of the intestine, judge that which is detained inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the treatment of him with iron, then it is advisable that we command the patient to be bled if it is possible for them, and at times touch the body of the patient.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let it be raised above the seat on some occasion or another, and place your hands under the patient's armpits.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit at the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of them, which extends their arm between the two hips to the crotch of the genitals and to the division of the navel of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and divide the crotch of the genitals at the middle place for the length between the navel and the perineum.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the section be made according to a straight measurement distant from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white hip, including.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And scrape that, and observe, and be careful so that you do not cut into it; and your scraping with which you scrape the affected part should be suspended in the mouth of the more subtle and scrutinized according to the quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then perforate the spleen full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the wound with forceps, and pull the spleen apart from the surrounding parts; and do not touch the ligaments that hold it, and insert the spleen in whatever manner is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And insert it in its entirety or in pieces, and especially the subtle sieve, because if you do not examine the insertion of it with great care, it is not done securely so that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the wound proceeds from that defect of its ligament during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the spleen, return inside, and then adjust the two lips of the ligament with a suture, and then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you ligate the vessels which suspend it, and extract the wound, and then cure it with the same method that we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then know that these are the hernias; therefore insert that part according to what you have done on the other side; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then return the blood, and insert the woolen cloth submerged in oil or in roasted oil; and remove the dressings from another cloth which you had submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over two genital areas and the navel of the belly; and remove the double sheets and powders, and tie those over with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two sheets and fill them with cambray wool according to this likeness; and make extremities with which you press the cot or wet wool, and add them to the structure of the pants, and one of the extremities take from the crotch between the two, and the second take at the division of the perineum, and two extremities over two hips of the patient, and two other extremities over two ankles, and all the structure be adjusted in the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And some times this hernia is medicated artificially with a cautery in place of a section with iron; and it is that you take a thin cutting cautery and that you write on the codon of the genitals, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until it is discovered the white siphus containing the water, and then you take the cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It is assembled with Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce that bile vessel, and ignite it so that all the humidity is driven out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then stretch the bile vessel with tongs, and scrape it with tongs, and scrape it with a subtle ignited cautery; and cut that part which is possible for you to remove all of it; and beware of the mucus so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is more safe and less prone to flow of blood, and better than the operation with section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you experience an adverse event with abscess during the time of section or during cautery, or flow of blood, then take care to cure the adverse condition that has occurred to you, with the cure that is convenient for it, according to what has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is poor, and does not await the second operation due to its horror, then administer the perforation as I have recommended; and it is when you are certain of this, for what we have said about the symptoms, that that hernia is painful.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then take care to place the patient on some elevated seat, and pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let there be a wide opening through which all the water flows.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then put a stopper on that place and tie it and leave it, so that the remainder of the water runs.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then heal that which is inside where the wound is to be healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is an obstruction to the flow of water at that time, you perforate it: and this is not done except for the reason that the white pancreatic tissue in the orifice of the wound causes obstruction and prevents the flow of water, then you should put into the wound a needle or instrument with which the water from the drops is extracted, the form of which is described; or adjust on the opening of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you should know that the water returns, and is collected again in a few months or years; and as it is collected, then it should be perforated according to that measured manner, so that the patient will pass their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of the section on fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section on this hernia there is a fearful loss of life in the greatest complications; because to me it seems that the dismissal of it and being saved by that which is better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation in that and the species of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the abscess is born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is made for many causes: either by acute sharp superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And further, it is a hardened abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not give a sensation to it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some swellings are made by curvature of the arteries, and by inflammation of those, as has already been perceived, or by inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is by inflammation of the arteries is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and do not touch that.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is made by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause except for compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this species incision is made and on the other flesh; and that you cut the cord of the genitals, and then stretch the skin to the divided parts, and extract that from the white ciphac, and loosen the suspensor of the vessels, and tie them, and cut the suspensor so that you loosen that entirely from all the divisions of the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the humor has already consolidated in those fleshy parts, then it is advisable that you extract the humor and make incisions.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause in the spleen area, or between that which is between the ribs, then it is advisable that you release all that adhesion and make a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	More, if there is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it is advisable that you cut out all that belongs to it, and extract the humor as we have already said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool soaked in heated oil and wine; and then take care of it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernia that is of the intestine.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an apostema enveloped by some envelopment resembling a bruise with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult the exercise of movement and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is with fear for that which is preceded by remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must say operation according to what the first ones did.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	I say that it is good to place the patient on an elevated seat; and then push the suspensors of the testicles towards the separated thighs; and also take the cord of the genitals with the fingers, specifically at the places that are prone to injury by the penis; and hold those other servants that you have, and extend those with extension vehemently.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then cut into the spatium, beside the acute wound by cross-section in the right of the veins, until the veins are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then scratch the entire affected area thus as you have said in extraction of arthritis, which is in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then put in those a needle in which there is double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the places where you cut, and tie the other end in the back of it.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut into those in the middle place by right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the foul, corrupt, and fetid humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then heal the wound with a cure for the other wounds in which you want to be careful not to let the veins fall that are born from one of the two testicles, because it is not bad for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Mainly if vitality affects all the intestines, then it is good that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for this reason are removed from the intestines, so that they are deprived of all nutrition through the excision of the intestines, and that they are evacuated, or that this is done so that there is no junction with those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that involves the diaphragm extended over the belly from the region of the navel of the miracle of the belly, so that by saying the intestines of that rupture go to some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excursion, and these two species occur for many causes: either by percussion, or by fall, or by shouting, or by elevation of some heavy cause, or by similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this thing, when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms between the intestine and the navel so that the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to section of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it makes a vehement pain happen suddenly; and it is a diverse abscess appearing with the intestine protruding outside, and this is due to exit of the intestine, and the body of it to the parts below the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine bursts through the abdominal wall, and this condition is called intestinal hernia or bulging.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes it runs into the intestinal fold, and here it is retained, and this is a great danger to the patient, and sometimes it becomes painful and worse when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of the species of this disease with iron there is fear, because it is necessary that the evacuation be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of this is that we command the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the inner parts of its own cavity if it obeys its return, and then it is enveloped over its neck between your hands, and the legs are elevated.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stitch the ligature which is the ligature of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the ligature of the testicles throughout the length; and then place in both lips of the wound stitches as indicated to close the wound with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the wound, according to the quantity that is possible for you, from which the intestine has burst through.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrub away that cyst which is placed on the scrotum of the testicles, until the white hard lump of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert the pointed instrument into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white lump, which is placed on the scrotum of the testicle, and between the second lump, and dissolve with it the adherence that is in the part behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then bring the hand to the scrotum of the testicles to the front parts, and with it extend the white lump in its place with the left hand, and lift the testicle with the lump to the part of the incision; and command the assistant to extend the testicle upwards and you dissolve the adherence that is behind with a complex solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And search with the pointed instruments whether there is any cause of the intestine being wrapped in the hard white lump.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find on him any cause, then push it to the belly from behind.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle in which there is a thick thread of four threads, and insert it through the back of the lump, which is under the scrotum of the testicles, where the incision is; and then tie the extremities that come out of the thread until there are four threads, and then compose some of them over some figure in the shape of a cross; and tie it to the lump that we have spoken of, which is behind the scrotum of the testicles with strong ligature of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then envelop the extremities of the veins with a violent ligature so that none of the vessels can burst through, so that from here no abscess can be formed by the cautery.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another ligature following the first ligature, three fingers from it; and then these two ligatures hold back the skin of the scrotum, which is where the testicles are, the size of the said thing, and cut all the remaining part around in a curve, and remove from it the excess.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut in the part where the cord of the testicles is, by a section through which blood and pus can run, as we have recommended in what we have said before.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer the flaxseed soaked in oil, and apply it to the wound; and apply the ligature that we recommended (and if the white of the scrotum is cauterized, which we said concerning the incision of the vein of blood flow, because many times this happens) and loosen the ligature so that it does not fall off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the falling of the testicle is delayed, then let warm water be applied, and place it on that spot so that it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another cure for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter sixty-six.
De hernia ventosa.	Of bloated or windy hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been confined under the cure of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia with the vein; which is that you lift the vessels near the section above the one with facilitated flow; and lift the section in the middle place around the abscess with what obstructs it, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter sixty-seven.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disturbance that occurs in the ankle joints.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some swellings show rupture in the ankle joints as we have said, and bulge out the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not tell the genital area any cause of the intestine to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, there is adjusted a fissure in the hip until the intestine goes out in the hip; and this happens through the extension of the hip which is in the ankle joints as we have said, which cause is why the hip is stretched, and then it becomes mollified and the place becomes abscessed and bulges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The cure of it is with a cautery thus that is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some wounds are cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their thighs, and then dry the area of the rupture of the apostems with a scalpel by width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white spleen that is under the rib cage until it becomes uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the bladder and place it on the prominent area of the spleen, and press it against the pressure of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two prominent areas on the extremity of the bladder of the spleen, and adjust with a suture one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the bladder, and do not injure the spleen at all, nor extend the hole, nor another cause thus that you know how to proceed in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the treatment of wounds, and when you injure the veins, clean that and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the spleen is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And a cautery is better in this place, because it is more suitable for health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, it is softened by fat, because the flesh that is between it is softened, and its treatment is similar.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary for the one who takes care of him to make the patient urinate according to his custom, and let all the skin that has been softened above the natural skin; and then adjust the two lips to the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, cut in the beginning the excess of the softened skin with three stitches or four and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the stitches; and then cure by treating the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but for a reason it is legitimate for me to remind you of it in this book; and the reminder of it is not necessary except for two manners, one of which is that it be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in it, so that he knows the treatment of it to whom it happens; and the other manner is that we often have need of castration of other animals for our use, such as of many, and of oxen, and of pigs, and of similar ones to the animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that cauterization is performed in two ways: either by burning or by making an incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	More so in that which is done by burning, the way of the operation is that we make the beast sit in hot water until its genitals are softened and loosened and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take them with your hand so that they are relaxed and do not appear to be touched.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in cauterization done by incision, it is necessary that you hold the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the suspender, and make an incision above each testicle with a cut so that two testicles are separated.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those parts which have been excessively corrupted.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on the siphac any cause, except for a thin layer of skin which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of cauterization is better than that which is done by burning, because burning strongly leaves some cause for the testicles whereby the beast desires to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter twenty.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two manners: one is when it appears in that which occupies the space in the scrotum of testicles, in which there is a figure of a woman's womb between the two testicles.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some come out with urine from that hole which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	More in women is another species: it is that the womb of the woman on the perineum is similar to two testicles of a man, a little bit smaller and divided into two parts like the perineum of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three species: of two in men and of one species in women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should remove those adjusted carnifications so that the excess of that thing escapes, and then you will cure them with the treatment of the other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine is emitted, which is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter twenty-one.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On protruding lips and flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The ligature is strongly adjusted over natural causes within which it is tightened and made to secure the bandage; and some women are admired for it as much as men, in such a way that it is boasted about just like among men and is considered a virtue in the act.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then remove the excess of ligature with your hand or with scissors and clippers.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not cut too much, especially in the region of the vein, so that it does not provoke a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then take care of that wound with the cure of the wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Bad flesh is flesh that is born in the horror of the mother within which it fills, and strongly it is ejected to the divisions of the body following the likeness of a tumor (and for this reason some first call it "boiled disease"); therefore remove that we cut thus as we cut ligatures, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or the hole is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to illness which has preceded it, and that is caused by flesh not being adjusted or by a subtle or thin hip.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is made in the groin of the mother, or in her ribs, or in the upper part of her, or in the lower part of her, and prohibited from coitus and from impregnation and from swelling, and strengthen the prohibitions with medicines.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of that is made by examination of the matrix, if the obstruction is apparent, it is proclaimed; but if it is not apparent, then you search for that with your fingers or at the side.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a subtle cyst, and it is proclaimed to the two lips, then you touch and disrupt that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you apply poultices on the two lips, and then you touch the fingers indicating both hands to the affected areas.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two lips with force so that the subtle cyst is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take a woolen cloth and wet it in oil and apply it to the area, and keep it there all day so that the wound is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cyst is large and thick, then you should cut it with a spatula or with a knife of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	More pain is suspended if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that with an ointment, and cut into that.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And put on them the medicines that make stop the flow of blood with emollients, such as aloe, and dragon's blood, and essences, adjusted with white of egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound is not consolidated too lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And hold that for several days and administer a bath of warm water to dry it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it will be cured with another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And some fat tissues are born in the mother nature of other flesh, and then it is necessary to cut them according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to cancerous apostemas, for the cancerous apostema which is in the matrix let there not be made a counter-irritation with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 23.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that occurs in the cleft of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an appreciation of the orifices of many veins until from which the corrupted blood flows continually; and as they are antiquated hemorrhoids, they are made into tails.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And already said in the division of the species of those and the signs of those, I say thus which ones receive treatment and which ones do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that ulcers and hernias when they are in the womb of the mother and do not appear to the feeling, then in those cases treatment should not be done with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	More of those which are in the orifice of the mother, on which a catheter is placed, are those that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is good that you put the woman in a cold massage and then extend the thigh to the holes, or with a rough cloth, and cut those things at the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder on those wounds the flow of blood with one of the incisive powders that is mordication, thus as cassia and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then soak the feet in water for an hour, and then pause that one in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then make that one sit in a decoction of mugwort and roots of millet and flowers and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster and apply it to the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the blood is separated, it's good; and if not, make adhere to the two vents, and to the breasts an scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in juice of colicandle or in juice of arnagloza or in juice of guarravier that has been mixed with five medications, and make adhere to the area; and then heal the area with an ointment until it is healthy.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	More bitter is the treatment which is of harsh regard, so that you write down what appears to you from that symptom that I have said in the aforementioned ointment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal it until it is healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of an accidental wound in the matrix.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various species of accidental abscesses in the matrix, such as cancer and aposteme lampidense and ulcers and adhesive and eroded tumours and fistulous haemorrhoids and painful fluxions and thyl and other apostemes.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken of these diseases and the species of those and the signs of those and the cures for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that I speak in this treatise of abscesses about the one that appears in the matrix when it is one of the abscesses that collects healthy blood, and if you want to know in what manner the operation with iron is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore consider if the pain of the abscess in the beginning is sharp with percussion and inflammation and fever, and sometimes that swelling occurs and if it settles on the sentiment, then do not hesitate with perforation of it, and treat it with what helps to reduce the inflammation until the acuteness of the accidents subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then make the woman lie on a chair that has two chairs; and recline her back against the partition of the belly, and adjust her two feet to the part below the navel, and her thighs should be spread apart, and place her two arms below her shoulders, and tie each one with a ligament in a convenient way.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife takes hold of the right thigh and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the matrix is opened, the shape of which will be described in those cases that will be made next.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And then when you want to administer this instrument, insert the point of it into the womb of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the womb should not be larger than the womb itself and suitable for the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the womb, then make sure to place pouices on the texture of the womb so that the entrance of any instrument into the womb is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And when you place the vertebrae that run in the instrument of the side, above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebrae until the orifice of the mother is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excoria appears, and it is touched with the hand and is soft and moist, then it is necessary that you separate that which is on the head of the patient with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary that you apply on the wound a cloth submerged in oil of rose or green oil in which there is some astringency; and apply the chalk in the section in the womb of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And put forthwith on the mother and on the navel a clean cloth submerged in water in which are boiled mallows.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it will be cured, for two days with an ointment that is convenient to apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some times the womb and the wound are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which is boiled root of iris or aristology, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deeply embedded in the womb, then it is necessary that you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, but rather cure it with that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To instruct midwives in what manner the unborn babies should be treated as medicine when they are born prematurely, according to unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes in the beginning the figure of the natural childbirth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expel air during labor and desires to smell it, and above all she is relieved by what is above her, from the birth, and hastens the ejection of the embryo, then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it is the ejection of it over the pubic bone, and the second one is either suspended or pending from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see these signs, then it is necessary that the belly of the woman be compressed so that the embryo descends gently as when it descends over the pubic bone, it descends to it the secondine, and it is freed from those superfluous things with good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is other than this birth is unnatural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo is ejected on its feet and the body of the woman is ejected before her head and her feet, or one hand of hers, or at her foot, or her head and her hand, or at her belly, and forcibly it is turned over the pubic neck, and similar to the figures of unnatural births.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A necessary cause for the midwife is that she be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And she shows the entire figure of those things, and what device is in those things so that it is signified by them and is established upon them.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fever is situated on the head due to natural reckoning, and it is vehement on the woman and made in a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of the already debilitated liver, then make this remedy, or that women have it, and evaporate the congealed humor with warm and humid fumigations.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife inserts her hand between the woman's thighs, a small spatula, and cuts with it the second [labia], or touches that with her nail in order to scrape out what is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly so that the fetus comes out.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with a plaster of opium and a plaster of warm dung to stimulate.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, and anoint her with the plaster, that it be compressed and make her sneeze with condiments; and stop her mouth and her nose for one hour, so that the fetus will be forced out as soon as possible.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two thighs of the patient are extremely weakened at the beginning, then it is advisable that you reduce them with facility little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and raise her feet above her, and return the chair to the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall from the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the thighs are not torn apart and the foot dies, then cut those and extract the broken part of the foot or tie the body to the hand of the patient with a cloth and extract that one equally, because that will be weakened.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Descent of the embryo onto the two feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot is placed on the two feet, then it is advisable that you press those upwards, and return the foot to its place, and see to it, and take one of them and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when they have exited between the thighs, then you command it to him who assists, and make that one extend with condition, because it will be weakened if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not weakened with what we have recommended, then you return the foot little by little until it assumes its natural figure, because then it will be weakened with easy descent.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to apply all that we have recommended, then take the mucus of the high part and the dissolved gum, and strike everything in the mortar with a good blow, and return the stick to the woman's thigh, or the lower part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then make that mixture in lukewarm water, until it achieves the desired effects on the hypochondrium.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And as many times as the patient's parts are softened, then make for them a sub-fumigation of myrtle and apply that under their feet.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have given the sub-fumigation for one hour, then make a mixture on a chair, and return to make them sneeze and clear their mouth, and raise them from that, and press the lowest part of their abdomen with a gentle compression, so that the flatulence may be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Rise to the bottom of the feet on the seats and their hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the flatulence has risen in this manner, then put your knees between their hands little by little; and place the woman's face downwards on the nape of the neck, and her feet hanging down, and those should be resting on the bed, and join their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gently press on the stomach of the little one bit by bit, and extract what is left from their feet and ears before it is prepared in the affected area.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not turned outward, then take their feet and move them with vigorous movement, and gently press what is on the hips little by little until the fetus moves to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And insert your hands and pull the fetus little by little, and command the woman to push until the fetus is turned outward.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The position of the fetus is felt with the hand during the delivery.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Let it be put in reduction by the hand, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the woman and make her go to the bathroom.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if going to the bathroom is not possible, then make her sit on the edge, and strike the thighs with violent shock, and gently administer to them those things that cut and reduce swellings.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the birth is imminent, then have her sit on a chair, and attend to the reduction of the hand, and deliver the fetus according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to push until it is turned outward.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	We should take a sitting position over the bed with expanded hands and the surface of their feet towards the two sides of their mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the hand of the one who is giving birth and gently turn that small one little by little, and let that make it easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and how much it is narrowed, then pause on the edge of the one that we have recommended to anoint with oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And command her that she vomits little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit on a chair and command her to lean on the right side, and also command her to be compressed; and make her throw up with condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus exits over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you inspect the horror of the mother in this manner, consider, and then you insert your finger into the second one to evacuate the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the one, then you inspect that of the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then insert the fetus into the divided parts inside so that it pauses according to what is necessary, and send the woman to compress some times, and it will be thrown out with a gentle movement, if God or nature wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Outflow of twins or abundance of fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	It is known that some women give birth to twins, and some even to three or four, but this is strange and rare; however, I will explain the natural causes, and it is not unheard of.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And concerning those, it is already known that they are multiple, a second growth, and they are separated by a membrane, distinguishing them between the ligament in the navel of each of them. And some women are born with a natural fissure, so that it seems like a miracle of nature, and some women are born with an unnatural fissure, as we have already recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver, it is necessary for the midwife to proceed with what we have said about unnatural births, then you will treat them in the same way that we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with facility and subtlety, and with slowness, and is ingenious according to the entire figure as it has been prepared by the art leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering what is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are formed with one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more, and it is necessary for me to verify that a woman aborts nine, and another ten, all formed, which thing was made by the measurement of the glorious wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this shows that it is in the science of midwifery that one must hold firmly to that small part which seems insignificant, and thus one holds onto it as if it were a precious thing.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus with the method we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not an emergency, and you are not forced to use operation, then consider if the woman is of good virtue and not at risk for accidents by which there would be danger to her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back on a seat or chair, with her head inclined downwards and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the operator should hold the woman's two parts or tie her to the seat so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And immediately anoint the mouth of the matrix (womb) with oils, mucus, and extracts of wormwood, fenugreek, and sesame.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucus, and then inserts her hand with ease into the womb, and then feels for the place where the fetus is stuck.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And place conveniently in that: then consider if the foot is prepared that you will put on the head, and then you fix the nails in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or give the beard, or in the throat of it, or in the proper places of the ribs, or give the hips.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	More if the putting is on the feet of it, then in the knee, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And take that you hold the nail with your right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and introduce the hand with ease and put the nail in some of those places that we have said, until it reaches the hollow cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and put on the application of it another nail, or the third if it is necessary, so that it be equally attracted, and not extended according to its straightness just as much.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Until the hand is moved to the entire affected part, so that the weight of it be alleviated thus as it is done in two ways for the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And take in that which is between them that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then take that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and introduces them skillfully and stirs with those fingers in that place that is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the part of the foot is forgotten, then the ankles should be anointed with a remedy to be put in that place; and do so until the entire foot is treated.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is stuck to the other, and it's not possible to reduce it by constriction, then it's necessary that a bandage be wrapped around it; and carefully extract it until it's all treated, and incise it either in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same on the other hand and on the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the foot is large, or adheres to the constriction in the extremity, or is at the head of the water adjusted, then it's necessary that an intermediate spatula be inserted between the toes and the head be opened and the water extracted, or that it be scraped with an instrument called “alundat”, the shape of which will be described along with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter that is appropriate to this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the foot has a naturally large head: then it's necessary that it be incised with a chisel, or that it be scraped with an alundat as we have said; and carefully extract the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is elevated and constricted by the armpit, then it should be cut open so that the humidity which is in the chest can be expelled.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	More or less, if it's not complicated, nor does it obstruct breathing, then you should raise the head as much as is possible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the abdomen is swollen with abscesses or it is dropsical, then it is necessary that you perforate that area through which the humidity that is in it can flow.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	More or less, if the fetus is positioned above the two feet, then its attraction is to the left and its direction to the mouth of the womb is to the left.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	More or less, if it is constricted by the abdomen and chest, then it is necessary that you extract that which is wrapped in a cloth, which you have placed over your hand, and that you cut open the abdomen and chest so that what is in them can flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	More or less, if the other members are stopped and the head is turned, then the midwife inserts her left hand; more or less, if the mouth of the womb is open, then she inserts her hand into the middle of the womb, and pulls towards herself the head, and draws that which is with the fingers into the mouth of the womb, and inserts in it one or two inches, and draws it towards herself.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted by a posthumous cauterization which adheres to the urine, then it is good that there not be trouble upon it; moreover it is good to administer an infusion of humid and fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fever is on the sixth day, then if possible, it should be pricked: and there should be administered what we have said in the case of the living liver.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then let it be cut into slices, and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is good that no cause of the interior be left in the secondine ( likely referring to a part of the body or an organ).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure in the aposthems (or abscesses) that adhere to the matrix.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is an issue of bloody flux, then dip in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in whose belly was a dead fetus, and then upon that womb another conceived and pregnant one, and the dead fetus is the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens to him that for a long time an abscess forms in his sick intestine; and it becomes inflamed inside where the focus is opened, and begins to take arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And he was called to his cure, and treated for a long time, and the wound is not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then he applied to him from several causes a plaster of strong attraction, and extracted from him a bone, and then passed through his intestines, and extracted another bone; and it was greatly marveled, since in the belly there is not a bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then he thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then he probed the wound, and extracted from it many bones, a woman existing in her intestines with thousands of dispositions, and already lived in such a manner for a long time, correcting from him a little arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And he did not find it strange, but rather that in this there is science and help to him who the doctor artificially makes by hand for the purpose of cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Shape of a vertebra in which the matrix is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the shape of a holder in which the liberties are wrapped, to which wrapping two vertebrae are joined at both extremities of two thighs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	May the emperor grant this virtue with what is subtly drawn from the strictor, and made either of ebony or of beechwood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each staff is two fingers and the thickness of each one is a finger, and the length of each one is a palm and a half; and in the middle place of two staffs there are two adjustments of the same wood, which are already fixed, of which the length is a little more than half a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions will be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is open to those when you administer the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Make another similar form to that one, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made of ebony or beechwood staffs according to the similarity of the forces.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	May the emperor have at the extremity of it two additions thus many times, and the length of these additions is about a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother with these, then you will make the woman raise her legs, hanging them from the bed, opening that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then take your hand with the instrument in such a way that you make an incision according to the quantity that you want of the thickness of the mouth of the matrix, until the meter makes what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertigo which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of inflammation by which the foot is swollen:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of friendship by which the big head is congested
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled with forceps to which the teeth are in the extremity, like scissors, and some times it is made long like forceps according to this form, like scissors, to which the teeth are like teeth of rescue on which it has been incised and congested.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of small friendship:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a wound having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a wound having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which the teeth are of wax, on which the head of the foot is congested:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities, on which the head is cut off:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when they are multiplied, the species of that one are prepared by the artisans, as much as it is easier for their operation and more useful to men because of their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not think that those instruments are yours to wield, for the necessity of them is not an excuse.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the secondine (or possibly "the afterbirth").
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the afterbirth is retained, you must command the patient to retain it, and make her throw up with condiments, and hold your hand over her mouth and nostrils, and if by doing so it does not come out, well.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a woolen cloth and perforate in the cover a hole and put on that opening of the mouth of the matrix, thus as calamint and rue and anise and chamomile and aristolian and cassia wood and holy tree.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	Soak all these herbs or some of them in water in the cloth, and place that over the womb.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then put a cane tube in the mouth of the matrix, and hold it there until the vapor comes to the cavity of the matrix.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And make her throw up as we have said, and the afterbirth will be expelled with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this cure is not effective, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of juniper or in extract of wormwood, and then insert it into the womb and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, then take it out piece by piece. But if it is stuck in the matrix's perineum, then insert the hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the afterbirth, extract it little by little according to the rule so that the matrix does not fall into vehement pain.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Above all, it is desirable that the right and left costs be permeated with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust in the quantity of attraction, for it will obey and evacuate through adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the matrix is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with purging and medication of the bile with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not forgotten for all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not perform on that in iteration of abstraction, but rather it is desirable that what is excreted from it to the mouth of the matrix lies at the thigh of the woman, and then anoint that with gum and tetrapharmacon; because that will make her purge for several days and it will be dissolved and it will be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is purged, it rises from it to the head and to the stomach, and that torments the patient; and then it is desirable that sub-fumigations and conveniences be administered to it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already used a sub-fumigation of dried nasal roots and of dried fig leaves.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and of the afterbirth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It must be made from a vein or artery.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the thin extremity be placed in the pot and the wider extremity over the fire, and the sub-fumigation be placed on the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that in until the sub-fumigation is consumed and another one is put in its place.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the navel of an unperforated infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many infants are born and their navels are not perforated, which have a thin and closed cicatrix.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce with a needle that navel, and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the liver.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And immediately apply on that place a flannel cloth soaked in wine and oil; and treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is closed, then insert a small tube into the navel for many days, and block it when the infant needs to cry.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if there is closure of the navel due to consolidation of a wound or an abscess; then it is necessary that this consolidation be cut, and immediately treated with what we have said about the treatment and the plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	About the cure of fistulas that occur in the eyes.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that appear in the lower part of the eye are a sign of a bad and gross tumor, which appears near the anus or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many tumors.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that tumor is old and rotten from the moist whitish or subtle decay, and some of these fistulas are seen to be penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating ones are known by what is exiting from them through discharge and flatulence; and some times the patient uses the discharge, and it is forced out of them with worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are seen to be penetrating in the space, entering into the bladder, and entering into the flesh of the penis; and some of these penetrations enter into the joint of the thigh and into the nut of the scrotum.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that in which a penetrating fistula is recognized entering into the anus and non-penetrating, is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you insert a thin thread of wool or iron into the fistula when it is not suppurating.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is suppuration in it, then insert into it a thin thread of lead or horsehair that you feel with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel the whole of it nor any process of the gut causing any expulsion or worm or gas, thus as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then hasten to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is emission of urine from that and prohibition of it to such an extent that the place be consolidated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	More so if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and increases pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the tendon is perforated inside here if there isn't fracture inside the bone, and increase of pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that of it is purulent discharge; and that it doesn't respond to medication, nor is consolidated with plaster.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure for everything, and the cure of those is labor and vainness of the foolish doctors regarding which they boast.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, health with iron is hoped for, according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been tried and proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient goes between your hands over the back of theirs and raises their legs inside them, the thighs bent to their belly, and then insert a probe of lead, or of iron if there is fracture in the fistula, so that you can feel the place where the tendon is perforated.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that sense of the patient turns around the neck, then it is necessary that you insert your finger inside the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger the tendon already exposed and uncovered to penetrate, or what you feel between the tendon and that sinew or flesh, then be certain that this is the penetrating one; and do not work on that, because it is not in that place the healing, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	More often doctors say that there are healthy parts in some men's thighs.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which healing is hoped for, you should make a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then turn it two or three times until you know that all those adjusted flesh, formed into fistulas, are adhered, resembling a feather of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that wound with bandages wrapped in gauze until all the adjusted flesh is united, and then treat it with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, well; and if not, then it is not healed in a suitable time for another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the intestine of the said thing which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is a thin piece of flesh or of tissue, and sometimes the fistula in what is the surface of the codena, then cut the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will have cut with the probe, and it will be in the fistula until the section reaches the place where the extremity of the probe appears, and through the probe it is liberated and extracted.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	Then carefully clean those fistulated flesh wounds which are assembled to the channel of the needle and do not break any of those channels for fear that it may cause complications.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	More often if there is a flow of blood or pus that comes between you and your operation when you dissect those flesh wounds, then the milk that will be is from the instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts good habits: it is adjustment of those adjusted flesh, and removal of the bloody excretion of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then heal that wound which is covered in bandages or in dressings within the place where the arm is, and then heal the wound with gum or with hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medications are applied in which there is stipulation and purging; when the hour is restored it is already healed and you do not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	More often if the fistula has passed into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and ask about that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And then if you feel the tension and between you and it is a veil of skin or of flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather a way of trust and of hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This cause is to administer in it one of three manners: either that you cauterize it thus as we have said; or that you purge it within until you achieve its cavity so that it is possible for you to insert the instruments and the prepared cure; and do not proceed with more purging than necessary so that you do not irritate the containing lacert, and that you act above the patient's will; and then treat it with what we have said before, since it will be strong; or that you extend this veil and remove the pus that you purge within near the anus, thus as we have said, either with the finger or with another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those fistulized flesh which are in the purged area where you can perforate; and then strive to make the restoration of the entire wound with purging, and if the underlying pus is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And certain fistulas are finished in this manner: it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is in the flesh of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the cod and in the margin of the buttocks, then take the tent of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the orifices according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that vein wrapped with five veins or around those; and then insert the tent into the vein in the fistula until it achieves the cavity of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	More if it is penetrating the margin of the buttocks deeply, then you extract the vein from that hole so that you insert your finger in the buttocks; and extract the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or for two, and when you press the vein into the flesh, tighten both until those fleshes are pressed which are between the two extremities of the vein and which fall.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	More if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate, in whatever manner you are prepared, but let it be moved by the groin, for it is not for you to do this so that the lacert does not press; and then do this until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spatula is spiked at the end where the fistula is divided: its curvature is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not insert unnecessarily, thus as needed.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of suture of hemorrhoids in which runs blood in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are according to two methods, either between the buttocks or what is of carbuncles, or if those are with fat of rushes.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those are small and large, and the blood runs from those tumors and it is one, and very painful, and outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	Worse are those that are outside the anus according to the measure of little humidity, from which runs yellow water or a little blood with continuous flow, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is next to the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to press inside so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take and suspend with force or you hold those with your fingernail, and then you cut those according to their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the ulcers are not held in those places by the humidity and softening of them, then take those with a coarse cloth or with a cotton swab or with a flannel of wool, and extract those with the fingers, and return to put on top of them some powders, dusting over them some cauterizing powders near the incision, so that they are held in place of a cautery; or cauterize those as it was explained in the chapter about cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal those with another cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey to evacuation, then anoint the patient with a cluster in which there is a mild purging, and let it be washed with that water which is in the basin and which will make the anus evacuate more easily when the patient strains.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are very painful in the anus, then the cause of them is the easiest to cure, and it is that you take those with your fingernail, or that you take those with a needle, and insert those, and then heal those with the water that we have mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the one that has an incision, it is necessary to administer a suture of them in this manner: take thread and pass it through the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the divisions above, and make that penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two extractions of the thread around the division behind the needle, and longitudinally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong structure, and then knot the thread and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Make a cut in that area, and let out one of those, but not the marrow, so that the excess blood from that vein may flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a poultice made from rose oil or wax on the buttocks, and put that on the anus, and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And let it enter into that wound; and when it is digested, treat those with an ointment or with another cure so that they may be healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Mouth wounds caused by excessive evacuation of mucus or by constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and of no value in that medicine, it is fitting that you treat those with the application of spit or with your nail into which moisture is made, and let the dirty pus be expelled from them, which prevents them from consolidating; and then treat those so that they may be consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then apply those with a violent purging that the first one enters much blood and they are scraped off; and then treat those so that they may be healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of ulcers of the nostrils, this is clear.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	It is known that the ulcers of the nostrils are clear, and not otherwise, unless noted by a redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of nails, and it is made in all the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the toes, and it comes from those joint pains.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary that what has grown in the circuit of the claw be taken hold of with the tongs or with an iron clamp, and be eradicated from its root; and then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in the following chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More precisely, a wart is a small, rough, rounded, and fistulated protrusion on the surface of the body, and similar growths appear on the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to stretch or cut that out, or to tighten that with a thread or a probe that fits inside.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the warts, both inward and outward, are eradicated with the instrument that you were told about.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More precisely, ringworm is a small, fuzzy, or fistulated thick growth on the surface of the body, especially on the thigh, and when it touches that it seems to be inflamed in the likeness of an ulceration of ringworm, and it is found around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a needle of cotton thread or of wool thread, and let it be strong, and pass it over the ringworm until it contains the circle of the thread with the parts that surround it; and then insert your hand with the needle into the area surrounding the ringworm, and push that into the thigh of the flesh, and eradicate the ringworm from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make this with a cane of brass or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part of the cane that penetrates have subtlety, be blunt (that is not perforated), wrapped in such a way that on the said thing the absorption of it is alleviated and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the ant hill according to what is stated in the cauterization of the sore in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give relief.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some poultices are made of silver or gold or melted or beaten brass; and some poultices are made from those small and large instruments according to those for which they are administered, because that which is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are cold or painful, their poultices should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and few poultices:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cane where the bag is tied should be wide in this manner; and let the distinction be where the bag is tied, thus many times.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the part that is inserted in the buttocks, which is penetrating, should be blunt (that is not pointed), smooth to subtlety; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and let the width of the hole be according to the thickness of the rods and a little thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag be in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of skin of sheep, and its size be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be perforated by many holes thus as it is rolled up; and if the space which is between the holes is the thickness of the said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those holes a strong and crude filament which should be of twelve filaments, or wrap around those; and adjust to it the bag; and when the bag is placed on it, let it be tight at the head of the patient between two distinguishing strengths with forced constriction, and then constrict each hole: The quality of constricting for that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it not be too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be raised on their back, and lift their legs up and place under them a cushion on which are already the men or a plank; and anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with white of egg or with mucus of fenugreek or of similar things; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister takes the bag and expresses it with two fingers and strongly with violence until everything that is in the gut is evacuated from the bowel; and then remove the gut and the patient lifts their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces out the excess, hold it in as much as possible; and if you sleep on it for an entire night, it is more beneficial in treatment.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More so if you treat it in diseases of abdominal discharge and its evacuation, then you will apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are painful hemorrhoids or abscesses, then let the treatment be subtle and gentle, of the treatments with which the children are treated.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already spoken in the division of the treatment of wounds what is suitable for the free, and I say thus the treatment of those with medicine according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that wounds are diversified according to what they are made of and according to the place where the wound occurs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many wounds are made are like this: a blow with a stone, or a cut with a sword, or with a knife, or a hit with a lance, or with a fist, or with an arrow, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More wounds that are in the places of the body are like this: a wound on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And thus we recommend the treatment of certain wounds for which we pause this reasoning and rule over other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And we will begin with the simple head wounds, for the discussion of the composite ones will come to the commentary of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Thus I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or something similar, and the skin has only been scratched and it is a large wound and you fear the onset of an apostemic infection, then you should be cautious and perform a cephalic bloodletting at once, and do not delay; and extract from that vein according to the quantity of the virtue needed by the patient, unless there is some prohibitive cause for bloodletting, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is scarce.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the bloodletting be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and protect the patient from replenishment and from wine and from coarse foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits minor bloodletting, then let it be reduced from the diet and not approached with meat nor wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And apply to the wound, if an apostemic infection occurs, cotton soaked in rose oil or in wine in which is added a styptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	More surely if it is secure to apply a hot poultice, then pause on the wound, if it is recent with blood and the air has not altered that powder which you will recommend to apply in a small amount.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed it, then pause on other soothing ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	More if the wound is large or is by incision of tissue and of similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted by threads, then adjust them with a suture as you will recommend from the suture of others.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	More if the wound has already exposed the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by them but only a small suspensor, then incise that and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of decayed tissue, and command the patient to abstain from foods in which there is coarseness: cabbage and beans and similar things to them, until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find in the decayed tissue putridness and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that rotten part and throw it away, and treat the area.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	More if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which a flow of blood can come, and it is not stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find it uncut, then cut it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity provokes that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is an ulceration; thus you should powder over those wounds a powdered substance, which consolidates and heals them before the air touches them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take oil of iris one part, dragon's blood two parts, and unslaked lime three parts; grind everything together and crush it, and fill the wound with it, and constrain it with a good bandage so that it stays on the affected area, and coagulate it with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then tightly bind the dressing with pulvils and leave it, and do not remove it while it is like this so that it does not become infected, for the medicine is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this sole treatment is enough, when you have at hand iris and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this medical operation is performed on large wounds when it is convenient to place it on them and they are constrained, and also on recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially in summer, then it is not suitable for the application of this powder, but rather cure them with what we have said, so that you apply on them some digestive ointments, or apply on them powders made from wheat flour mixed with water and honey until they form a paste; and then cure them with another treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Mainly if the fracture occurs in the bone and is small, then you extract it with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment of head fractures in that which is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the sores of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Mainly if the sore occurs on the neck, then it is not different in medication, and between the sore of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	Mainly if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, it is not in the remedy but rather the treatment should be avoided with that which causes vehement constriction, thus as to say and to warn that it is poison and similar to their destruction because it harms the nerves and contradicts them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not put anything on the sore that causes total freezing, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with light medicines, such as being washed with warm water, some ointment rubbed in oil or not-rubbed, and turpentine when it is washed with warm water and the other dressings made according to this manner, and anointed with humid.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, then administer a suture, or sew up the lips of it, and immediately cure that with powders so that it may be healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If the wound has depth or reaches to the lowest part of the body, then perforate it in the place most depressed.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an artery has already been cut in the wound and a flow of blood is obtained, then stop it or ligate it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the tendons of the shoulder or all have been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with suture on the edge of the shoulder and do not touch that; afterwards put it back in its natural shape, and immediately strengthen it with a decent dressing, and leave it for several days; and immediately cure it with an ointment in which there is stimulation and excitation so that it may be healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already formed a scab on the bone, then pierce it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can; and what you cannot remove, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and it will be separated and the pressure of it will be alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then powder on that powder which is recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	More so if in the wound there is made a fistula, then cure it with that which memory will bring back to the seventh chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or of similar (ones) when made between the shoulders and is made with a spatula or with a knife or with a lance or with similars.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a piercing of a lance or of a knife, and observe its depth, then consider more so if from the wound comes foulness when the patient urinates; then know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in it there is no depth and the wound is recent to the seventh blood, then you put on it at the first hour powder, and do not remove that which is not retained by the blood in the depth of it and which returns to the heart and which helps the patient, more put on it a attracting plaster, and apply those two remedies seen the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the plaster is not at your presence, then put on the orifice of the wound a cotton cloth by which it sucks what comes from the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps on the wound so that what is in it adjusted runs.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If the plague has already passed three days or more and does not affect the patient with spasms or tremors of the heart, nor with strictures of the gut, and other good dispositions of it, then know that the plague is salvageable; and therefore treat that one with warmth and with another cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of it is hindered, and a long time has passed, then know that a fistula has been made; therefore treat that through the sixth chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is by a cut of a sword or a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then treat that with water that is followed by stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If a judgment has already been made on the bone, and its incisions are deep, then twist the wound and cut to extract those splinters, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound suppurates, so that their extraction is facilitated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental wounds in the other limbs, the cure for youth is the same as what we have said regarding water.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ailments of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the great indisposition, some see the intestine or the nerve of the intestine being affected, for which there is made a violent and subtle disruption of them and the suture of them.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another hand, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if not done with care regarding the disruption of them to their place at first, because the intestine swells and becomes inflamed, for which the intrusion of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that the suture of the belly is according to four methods, but two sutures are common which are also suitable for sutures of the other ailments of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are specific and relate to the other ailments, but however they are more specific in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I have recommended to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the intestine through that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either due to lack of rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has come inflammation from the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when it is thus, then it is good that you make a poultice in this way: that you submerge a sponge or cloth humid in warm water alone, or that you take cypress, and spikenard, and embroideries in water, and apply them to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And some women do it in a way where they have stipulated, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is cooked altea and mallows, because by this the inward part of it is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the inward part of it is excused from this cure, then you should make a small incision with an instrument by which the swollen and inflamed parts are cut.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better, when it is proper that there is no cutting, and it is not necessary to cut, except in case of necessity and defect.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, know the shape of it:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp-edged, and the other part not-edged, and the extremity is subtle, and it should not be as subtle as a spatulum, but rather somewhat blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And then when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is outside, it is good that its reduction be according to the natural form, in its own proper place, if possible above it, which is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	More often when the rupture is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, it is good that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs up higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head and chest higher than the lower parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then put your attention and consideration into balance so that the part in which the wound is, is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus it is good that you administer this in severe wounds and in moderate wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, put what you have prepared, and see to it that the minister be among your most trusted ones, who will hold the rupture with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and carefully uncover from that one to that which is the suture for some other cause or another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: one that takes the needle, or counts the threads according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then sews the thread on the extremity of the disruption of the said ankle, and pulls the needle once, without putting fiber in the two extremities of the codena, but rather in the two extremities of the siphac that is behind the codena of the separated parts, until you make that part penetrate; and you have already added the two extremities of the codena and the two extremities of the siphac, and thus makes four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then pull with a double thread in the circuit of the needle, and some times pass through both parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound for decent addition; and then sew the thickness of the said and fix another needle in it, and then tie that with a thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be moderate between thickness and subtlety, for the subtle needles easily enter the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to introduce into the codena, and therefore it is good that they are moderate in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not advisable that the needle be inserted in both extremities of the codena, so that the flesh is not excessively damaged and the wound closes before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be prolonged with stitching so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the threads so that the patient does not feel them during sleep; and you will place expansive powders on the entire suture, which hold the ends of the threads; and leave them there until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of stitching with needles is more conveniently used on small wounds, for which the stitching of one or two threads around them is sufficient.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second stitching is communal: and it is that you administer with stitching the four extremities, of the skin and two extremities of the navel, in one way, with a needle in which is wrapped thread both in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have with the needle penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that middle part where it began, so that the thread is pulled back from the deepest part to the wound, so that the stitching is like stitching of cloth in which the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And stop between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the said finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture I have treated the wound which was inflicted on a man in his lower abdomen, which had been wounded by a knife, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm in length, and it was exiting from the intestines around two palms from the middle intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I have returned that which the intestine had come out of the wound for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and I cured him and he is healed; then I have visited him for many years, and he has conversed in his own faculties.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and it was a miracle, because I did not cure him with an ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was of no use, but instead I applied to the wound a warm double dressing twice a day and assiduous washing with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I would say two special kinds of suture, proper according to the narrative of Galen.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the stitching of the tendon, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus with the needle penetrating the tendon and in that doctor's hand, according to rectitude and length of the whole body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate the other extremity from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the thread.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetrate, then make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the thread from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the suture which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make it penetrate with your penetration, with which you make it penetrate the suture, in the extremity of the thread, which is in the part of it within, so that all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin with this doctor's stitch and sew with the extremity that is of the suture on the other side, and pull out the needle from the tendon which penetrated, and then put it back in that tendon and sew the extremity of the suture which is on the other side with this extremity of the thread; and pull out that one from the tendon which is on the part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And make one dressing and another, and make one dressing adjacent to another dressing between which you press all that is deformed according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of sewing is that you press with a sewing of pellicies on which you sew the skins, in such a way that you press one dressing on the part of the extremity of the codena, and that you leave another dressing between which you have it complicated.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	More, the second species of proper sewing, which Galen specifically calls, and this is to be recommended by him and for him, is that you press the second similarity with which all medical doctors sew, in such a way that they join the entire affected part to its corresponding unaffected part, conveniently by nature; and they apply the extremity of one to the extremity of the other, and this is done according to what has been recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Take the needle and insert it at the extremity of the mirror to your own proportion of the deformed part, and make it penetrate the internal part in that sole, and leave two extremities of the ciphac; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the ciphac.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then return the rolled bandages, and make each of them penetrate from the outer part into the inner part through two extremities of the mirror-like areas that are on the opposite sides.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of stitching is better than the common stitching, and it is the stitching of which I mentioned previously in remembrance.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more I said to you, the stitching of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert in these each a thread, and start with the insertion of the needle from that which you have beside you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the stitching of those who sew together the entrails.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the stitching of it is more difficult than that of the other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	More the judgment of the treatment of a wound is a judgment of the other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which thing is because when you touch the recent wound with your blood, it alters that, and reduces the swelling, and sews it, and adapts it properly, then put on it a powder that promotes flesh growth.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply a plaster on that ulcer, which you will press between your fingers to make a hard crust and cauterize the veins, and consolidate and treat it; and cure that wound just as you would the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you are not present with the medicines, then apply to that tumor, since it begins to throw out arm and cut away the dead skin, and change the dressing twice a day, just as you have instructed, until it is healed, because you do not need another medication in most cases when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you suspect that the wound will communicate with a lesion to the main limbs, then take a woolen cloth and submerge it in oil of tempered quality, or in rose oil, and apply it to the circuit of the areas that are between the joints and give relief to the affected areas.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestinal pouches, because many times it becomes inflamed, then anoint it with a black topical plaster, and more so if the pus has spread to the intestine and made an ulcer that penetrates into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	It is known that the one related to the large intestine is of more sluggish healing than the one in the subtle intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the intestine that is called "gijunum" does not receive healing from a wound that falls on it completely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of them that are in those, and the subtlety of the body of that one, and the proximity of that one to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Moreover if what proceeds from the wound is the tissue, and you treat that recent one, return it according to your rectitude with which you return the intestines to their place.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to the space and already is made into a green or black color, then you apply a faithful dressing on the place that is discolored, so that there come flows of blood, because in the tissue there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut that which is another ligament, and place two extremities of the dressing hanging from the part of the wound, so that on you be alleviated the attraction of it, and by the fall of the tissue and emission of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is pierced, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for example when I saw that which had been afflicted with a wound from a thrust of a lance and was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and there was an increase of gases and bloating.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Afterwards I began to ensure the cure of what had already been done so that it would not be compromised in the healing process, but rather I proceeded with subtlety on the inside where the wound was healed and the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I had placed on the patient a dressing to cover the area where the injury was in the stomach; and I did not find any relief from that evil accident and I remained with various dispositions eating and drinking, and then I entered into a bath and it is exercised by its own words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And I have described some experiments that when a wound is in the intestine and it is pierced, then it should be treated in this manner: take firm grips of large clamps; and adjust the two lips of the wound and place one grip of those that has its mouth open over the two lips of the wound; thus when you press on these and tighten their mouth, the head of the clamp is separated, which adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then stop putting another poultice on the first one, and do not cease to make other poultices according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and dress the wound; and break those adjacent capsule-like things in the intestine so that the intestine is healed; and do not cause harm to the patient with discomfort.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is tied with a thin string which is made from the intestine of a beast attached to it, because it is sharper than a needle; and it is that you take the end of these strings of intestine, and it is very delicate, and then tie the end of it with a string of wax, wrapped, and then insert this string into needles and sew it to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of sewing with poultices is not but according to a way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it is not a remedy but a subtlety, and it is not a complete healing of it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess which becomes inflamed and old, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and taken a long time and is not separated, however, in any member it may be, universally it is named fistula and we call it ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	Fistula according to truth is a nodulated, hard, white tumor in which there is no pain and for which there is conquest or relief, just as there is conquest of the pain of ausel; and for this reason it is called by that name, that is, painful tumor.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some men a humid (tumor), which discharges pus; and soon the humidity is cut off in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some times this humidity is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And already it has been said in the division, that when it is said about the wounds, that every ulcer that is not healed nor is in its bare flesh, is not so except for one of nine causes: of which one is or for lack of blood in the body; or for malice of it; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the birth of new flesh; or because it is of moved location; or because that ulcer in itself has putrid matter and the material that passes through it is of bad quality; or because medicine is inconvenient in its cure; or when corruption catches in the region, and it is pestilence; or for property of region just as it happens in Saragossa, in which difficult digestion of ailments is made, and delayed healing of apostema by nature is found; or because in it there is a bone, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	It shows all those causes, and the signs of those and the cure of them with medicine in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is suitable that you know the treatment of fistula, which is made by means of operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some of those are fistulas that affect the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed by composition as well as the hand and the foot; and some of those are near the main member and of similar things.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore one of these fistulas that is according to this method is of the illnesses of difficult healing, and does not receive treatment, and its occupation is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if one of the fistulas is of such depth that it does not reach to these places that have been said, and you hope and trust in its treatment, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or of bronze, and if the fistula follows straightly, and you inquire about it with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a thin lead probe, for the lightness of the lead on the body alleviates and cures the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has caused horrible movements, it is not possible for you to mark on it with the probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, purify the orifice through its orifices, for the humidity by which you purify that goes from the other orifices and corrects their flow.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And inquire meticulously, according to which manner it is possible for you to recognize if there are bones or nerves here, and it is the concavity of the fistula being long or short, or it is a fistula with many openings and this is on top of all your strength, in your penetration, in which you penetrate the patient, and the invention of pain by your compression on the area, and appearance of signs and causes accidental to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have established yourself on all those causes in a verified station, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near the place of salt, or a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places which you have told and said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula according to what is said in the narration of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of the excrements and of similar things, and cure that entry until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of long and profound depth, and it is according to the rectitude, then you try to insert that in the perineum as much as you can, and then clean that from all its corrupted flesh; and then administer warm poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have comprehended with the iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do that until some seen results come, so that the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments which produce healthy flesh, until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by that, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is a bone and it is necessary to certify that, then you inquire into it and dry it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prevent any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is discovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, then you must remove all the corrupted parts; and then treat that area with a remedy so that the flesh may be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and the arm is still as it was, then you know that you have not fully eradicated the corruption; and therefore you discover again with great care and diligence the reason for it and the purification of it with the last strong treatment, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And then if it is healed, that's good; and if not, you know that the corruption is in the deep inner part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in this case it is not ingenuity but laziness to leave that untreated.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible to extract it, then you extract it with subtle forces that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully make the extraction of all those, and do not leave any of them behind for any reason due to your weakness.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If you find opposition due to some cause of humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then cut through those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	More than if you do not prepare the hour to reset the bones of your operation, then place a poultice on the wound that promotes healing of that wound, and let it in among the bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated, and the section that you have made in your operation is constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having, if you fear, place on the wound a plaster submerged in warm oil, or a plaster submerged in Egyptian gum, or in juice of green plants, because when those ligaments are purified, and the bones are separated from the abscess, and from that attraction the alleviation is eased.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	More if it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface, then scrape that with a rasping tool as much as possible within so that the blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	More if that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to cut out that and to make an incision in the place where the corruption has invaded, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you go to a man in his thigh where you place that and an assistant to aid in your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There is a young man of about thirty years of age, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and from the parts divided above the material said of the body into which the material has come to the thigh, it is a matter of abscess or great abscess, and not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time is prolonged for that because of the error of doctors until the abscess has opened, and a gathering of foul matter, and its cure is delayed until the leg becomes fistulated, and there are made in the foul mouth sores which completely eliminated putridity and humidity from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors treated him for about two years, and he was not cured by their knowledge but by art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw his leg and the matters that flowed from it through those foul sores with great violence; and already the body of that man was completely corrupted and the color of it was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those sores and advanced the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then you scrutinize and probe all the orifices and investigate those that penetrate to them from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then you cut and dissect above one of the orifices those that enter where I discovered a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was rotten and corrupted and discolored; and a part of the leg was already corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then you scrub that which to me was discovered and prepared from the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you recognize that it is not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and scrubbed, and already had evacuated.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied the restoration of the wound with medicine consolidatives for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you returned and dissected above the bone secondly above the first discovery, and I found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I scrubbed that which appeared to me as that corruption, and then it was perforated in order to make the cure of it and restoration, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered on the other side and did not cease to cut the small bone little by little particularly and perforate the restoration of it, and it is not restored until I cut around a palm of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated lightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on them except for the preparation of their bowel and due to the scarcity of their tolerance and fear of death, because acidity occurs in them at all hours due to an excess of evacuation without a healthy digestion.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so it heals by complete healing, and there is nothing in place of hard flesh; and good disposition is made for them in their body and their strength returns; and it is established in their dispositions and does not cause discomfort in walking nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	More often if there is a prominent bone in the body already wounded, then it is necessary that you cut that bone in this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and stretch it at the end of that prominent bone, and tell someone to extend it with their hands; and take a coarse woolen thread thicker than the first thread; and apply that thread over the flesh that is beside the bone, and pull the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts beside, and you cut the flesh in the area where you want to make an incision so that the incision does not harm the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a wooden or bone splint beside the bone properly, because when you do this it is not prohibited that the saw does not cut the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the closure occurs on the corrupted area little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the bone and the corruption does not appear in its appearance to sensation, then force the closure of the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, often one part is connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle area or in a part of it, then you discover all the flesh of each part; and place your hand under the thighs, and close the first part where the corruption is until the closure of the other part is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the closure be according to the area of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut out that corrupted joint, and close the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the connection of two joints, then it is not in reason but in injury.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or of the foot, it is most difficult; however, it is necessary that you investigate the corruption in whatever manner it appears to you, and that you open that, and show that according to each disposition which is possible for you, and with caution injury be rectified by you, when it does not cause discomfort or numbness.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know that the fracture of these bones is dependent on the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that it is necessary to prepare all sorts of convenient instruments for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation refers to your expertise in the specific instrument that you need; for you have great study and knowledge and understanding of the methods of this art, and testimony of methods of diseases, for which you already have them through your experience, what is convenient for each disease with all instruments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And then you will be formed at the end of this chapter with the names of the instruments which you will handle simply, and with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on the others.
Forma de serra:	Shape of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of yet another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of a large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a razor or a blade:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this razor be in the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and its points be in the shape of the points of a three-pronged fork.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It does not suit unless with those constricted joints when they are corrupted, or it is the large and wide mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of greater erosion of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of lesser erosion:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of lateral erosion:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another properly made saw: make an arch of the iron above and the sharpness of the iron, and the member of the instrument of the file decently made.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of erosion in which there is a hollow:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle erosion:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another erosion with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of small erosion resembling a clamp:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of cutter with which the bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller cutter:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision tool; this one resembling a rasp, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the erosion of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of rasp that suits the erosion of that which is perforated by the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and of sharp extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made from iron of India, and similarly it covers all the causes that we have spoken of regarding gnawing and cutting and sawing.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision of extremities and of the sawing of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities are putrefied either by an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or when you apply medicine to that corruption for the cure of those medicines and the cure does not help, or sometimes the corruption goes up to the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it is necessary that you cut that member within that bone where the corruption has reached, so that the disease escapes through that of death or gangrene which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the signal of that which happens, is that the member becomes black within until it seems that fire has already consumed it, or it is covered with blackness within until the putrefaction reaches into that member which is next to it and which takes everything in the body; and thus you will know that you should cut that member.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if the cause of the corruption is a puncture by some venomous causes, such as that of the sea scorpion or of the viper or of the rue or of similar things.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the said, then you insert the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you insert that from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it swells, then insert the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes beyond and the swelling reaches the elbow, then in that case it is death for the patient; and to administer another cause or treatment in that circumstance is a matter of quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do to the foot when corruption swells the toe of the foot, then you insert it up to one of the ankles.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then you insert the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	More so if it reaches inside the tooth, then you insert the leg up to the joint of the tooth.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the tooth, then in him it is not a cure but rather dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the technique of cutting or severing it is that you stretch the ligament in the partition where you want to cut, and stretch another ligament on the spot; and extend the minister one ligament to the partitions where you want to cut, and extend the minister another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that the spatula can enter and all the flesh be exposed; and then it is cut or severed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover that a cloth of linen is placed on all the partitions so that it does not touch the spot itself, and let the adjusted poultice with cauterized paste come to the lesion.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if there is an excessive flow of blood when you operate, then you cauterize the spot gently, or apply to it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the wounded limb with a bandage in a convenient way, and cure it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his sixth foot, this doctor's accident which I and you have recommended, which is why the blackness occurs in the sixth foot with adjustment that was assembled from combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption occurs primarily in the sieve-like intestine that holds the whole foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself for the cure by going to the member with the violence of the one that provokes pain and adjustment of it, and it happens that the foot goes into the joint, and thus heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time does it take for this corrupt condition to occur in the said part of the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then comes to me, and I have thoroughly examined the excess that I placed on the hand of the medicines, near the purification of the body of it; and it is not excessive and begins to go to the other part inside which begins in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And it happened that I had to operate on the hand of it, and I did not want to do this operation above the excessive reaction, and more than I feared the incision of the death of the hand, because the virtue of the patient was in a state of decay.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he was cured by me, he returned to his land and it came to me that that man prepared and operated on his whole hand, and is healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And this narrative has not been joined except to be helpful regarding what is extracted from this disease, and that it be significance for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the cure of sins and the quality of purging with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When abscesses occur in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of blood, and then it is broken and perforated, and the blood comes out, and the place is washed with hot water as if it were a vessel, and the dressing that is applied on top of it is like a subtle cloth, and it does not lead to further corruption, and it does not impress upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and not a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged until the corruption affects some member, then it is called a fistula and not an abscess.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that a dressing is applied, like one that is turned and wrapped around, especially when it is made subtle and done with cloth, and bandages that do not stick to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the dressing will adhere and that the corruption will not have advanced by further consequence, then your cure is to apply a purging cluster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you put in has a foul smell, then administer a cluster with an Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and bitter vinegar and ginger, receiving equal portions, and adjust them in a vessel, and cook them over the fire until the medicine becomes soft and penetrates to the depth of the honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take the water that is necessary and mix it with water and honey; and introduce an enema into their anus, and cleanse their orifice, and administer the medicine to them for a duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that with a spoon; and do this for as many days until the anus is purified and the bad smell is eliminated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is administered with water of ash, when this medication is not present; and that is to take the ashes of vines, and put them in water; and then mix that and administer it as an enema until you are convinced that the anus is relieved.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medication or the water of ash, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed with ground ginger, and also administer it with wine and honey, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the wine makes the anus adhere, especially when the wine has been treated to remove its excess acidity and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this sometimes and are convinced that the anus is already cleaned, then administer an enema with water that makes flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	It is that you take an ointment of dissolution and dissolve it with olive oil and vinegar; or that you administer a suppository with certain medications and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the anus is narrow and the canal of the suppository is not received, then you widen it with a small iron instrument little by little, and place in the warm water wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in basilicon ointment until it is widened.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is large, then you bring together the lips of the wound with a suture and adjust the quantity in which the suppository is introduced.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of that from which the arm is elevated to the separated parts above, then dry that in the pus at the lowest place where it is near the passage through which the arm runs, for when the arm is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus through the passage of the pus below as you wish, then you should perforate so that you prepare the member with preparation for which the arm runs freely according to how it is apparelled and that no cause of retention of the arm remains.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Take medicines that consolidate and are applied on the convenient wound to what you want to extend those onto a piece of cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And let the cloth be of such great quantity as it covers the entire wound; and then insert in the holes of the cloth on the right of the orifice of the wound a tube put there, ample enough so that the orifice of the wound is not blocked; and then spread on another cloth of linen the plaster according to the quantity of the hole, and place it over that for a long position of the orifice of the wound so that the swelling of the arm is alleviated and do not press the cloth except to lift it up a little at a time.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	More, that which is on the orifice of the wound, which you change every hour so that it becomes adjusted to the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to know if what comes out of the arm is a lot or a little, or is digested, or not digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And then you consider the place of that wound, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is thrown on the orifice of the wound already adhered, or takes adherence, then you can dressing it on the third day, and when you dress the wound, then change the cloth for another and renew the plaster.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	More often if the sinus is approached with a subtle and gentle touch, do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it is appropriate, since in some cases delayed generation of flesh in the wounded areas occurs, and in those same cases the opposite of that is done.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus is touched by moving days and bad indigestion, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is a prolonged cause, then you adjust with desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as an ointment of diafinicon, when there is adjusted superflluity of addition of zeal.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best remedy by which it is cured, is that you take an ointment of diafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it on the wound with antique gum in its substance, and confirm this on him, and use it for him.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems similar in that action, when there is no bad indigestion, ointment of diafinicon, as much as it is cooked until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and ashes, and triturate all and pulverize over the honey when it is on the fire, and apply this on a cloth and tie it around the sinus; and apply that with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize on a cloth and tie it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes the aristolochia plant's long root and celestial lily (which is the celestial lily) and powder of centaury, and use of those simple or adjusted things, triturate them and pulverize over the honey which has been recommended; and use its juice.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sore is prolonged, and it's not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the patient's abdomen, and has already made its way into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you will cure it with a fistular treatment, as has been said before.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of wounded soles and rubbed-away nails and the cutting of added fingers and division.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	A panarici is an apostema which arises from the nail of the thumb or big toe of the hand or foot, and it appears in other fingers, and when it's prolonged its treatment is less prized, or it's cauterized with a hot iron, or it's corrupted, and it throws out a greenish matter that corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts entirely, and it perforates its corruption to the bone within which is to it a foul odor, and it makes the extremity of the said member, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And then when you have that tool which we mentioned in the division and do not confuse your treatment, it is good that you remove all the excess that remains from the nail and cauterize the wound properly with that tool, for cauterization is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already begun to compress the flesh at the edges, and they start to prick and cause pain, then it is good that you apply a subtle paste under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it upwards and cut that flesh with ease, and apply on top of that which remains from the corrosive medicines until it be completely removed; and properly treat that area with ointment until it be healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then it is good that you cut out the bone and extract it, for no time will heal the corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the decay and corruption reach to the finger, then you cut it out in one of the joints according to where the sensation is most affected, and properly treat that area until it be healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail receives a blow or injury, and it causes violent pain, then it is good that you start by applying flebotomy to the patient, and properly cut the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting transversely downwards, and beware that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause the patient violent pain, and it will be a cause of excessive scar tissue formation in the area; and properly treat that area with what calms the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	More said adjusted, which is born in the hands of some men, strong and muscular all over, and strong it is in their bones, or strong it is in their nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the said.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	More that which is born in some nodes of the said does not move badly, and this which is born in the joints is strongly moved.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you should insert the root of it with a spatula to the side.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of the amputation of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More in that which is born in the said nodes, it happens that you should insert at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then sew with one of those suitable needles for this, and then heal what is inside so that it is healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More consolidation which occurs to the said nodes between their moved parts or by birth of man who is born thus, or by consolidation of a wound or by combustion of fire, or by resemblance, therefore it happens that you cut this consolidation so that the said nodes return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between the layers of the swollen limbs in oil roasted so that they are not consolidated awkwardly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of the palm's digits, then you dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the incision of veins, there come varices.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varices, and they are thick, swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities that come in motion to the limbs of the body, and the greatest occurrence of them is in the thighs, especially in the thighs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it is necessary that you administer purification of the body from black bile with some evacuations to forceful expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure of them with iron is according to two methods: one is that the incision is made and the black blood is attracted out, and the other method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The treatment of it is according to this method: wrap the beginning of the thigh with hot water until the thick blood is dissolved, which is filthy, and then tie the patient's thigh tightly at the upper part of the hip inside to the back of the knee with a bandage, and then make an incision in one place, or two, or three with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with the hand from the back of the thigh within its confines, and from within outwards, until the amount of blood that you want is discharged and which satisfies the strength of the patient.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then attach that, and command them to abstain from foods that engender black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And the cure is achieved through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this does not harm the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	More elevation is achieved in this manner: you raise the patient's leg, if it is moved by them, and then put it in a bath and immerse the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled; or it can be exercised through vigorous exercise, if a bath is not available, until the member is warmed up.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then make an incision on the right of the vein for drainage in the loin or in the back of the knee, or at the lowest part of the knee, near the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then uncover the cord with an incision and scrape the vein from every part until it becomes apparent to feeling, and it is necessary for the appearance of what seems to be a black vein declining to darkness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus evacuate and from the cord you will find that white stuff which appears as a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then put your hand on the vein until it is elevated and emptied of the cord, and suspend it with an incision or a ligature.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section and apply that section for three days, and then scrape off the crust from the top of the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and incise it in the last section of the heel, and then extract it and lift it until it is freed by the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the section that is most superior or highest of all sections, until everything is freed; then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey to be extracted and lifted, then insert a double-threaded strong needle and tie it and extract it, or insert the instrument and turn your hand in every direction until it is discharged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And beware that it is not incised, for if it is torn, it will be difficult for you to lift the mortality and it comes upon the patient due to that nuisance.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when everything has been discharged, then apply on the place of the wound a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil, both raw and refined, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vita is constricted having twisted the area where there is an enclosure of the partitions, and it's not according to rectitude as we have said, then it's necessary that you make a ligature on that entire partition of twisting and on the areas of enclosure, and return the suture upwards with a bend so that you elevate that entire area.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And beware that your section does not cut the vein and that it does not harm that area, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your caution in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Figure of the incision on which the vita is cut:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a bent claw:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not suited to him to be pointed like the claws nor of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of coarse flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; but there is in it a superfluous coarseness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the curved vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in cold and damp lands, just as in the land of Arabia and in the dry and arid lands of little tenderness, and in which there are neither herb nor tree.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And the strength is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gestation of it is from putrefaction that comes from the gut, as when venomous things penetrate the body, such as snakes and worms and lice, generating between the gut and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the reception of its coming is from this vein that causes an inflamed swelling in the leg; and then the place becomes blistered; and then it starts to come out from the place of that blister, which seems to be a root of plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears, then take a piece of lead weighing one or two drachms, and tie it and let it hang suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as there are causes of it coming out in the divisions of the body, wrap them in lead and tie them.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the movement is prolonged, then cut a part of it and wrap the remainder; do not cut that which is rooted until it is completely removed, because if you cut it, it becomes contracted and enters into the flesh and causes to appear an aposteme and pus in the place and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	So that it can be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is removed from the back of the patient and no remainder of it stays in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein exits in some men who are in their length of 5 palms and 10 fingers and it has already reached me that one exits at 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it happens at the time of its medication, then introduce the needle into the hole of the patient and puncture that long hole in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then treat that one with the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes moves upwards, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to the foot with many openings, and exits from each opening a branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus treat that one as we have said in the division with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section concerning worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some lands near us as bovine disease because many times worms are found in the intestines and it's a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and swelling, and shows itself to our feeling from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of it is from the putrefaction of certain humors, just like when worms and serpents and intestinal parasites occur in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and is elevated to the head, and it reaches the brain, then it strongly grips the man and enters and destroys the brain, and that causes many visible evils.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not proceed unless you have examined the sensation and appearance of it, and then consider what is above it and what is below it with binding and strong constriction, and apply heat above it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is deeply embedded in the flesh and you do not touch it, then apply a cautery with fire on the place where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If it has reached the head near the brain, then apply a strong strictura on the eyebrow, and apply heat above it, and extract it; and consider that the patient use purging of their body with medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the cutting regarding the nausea.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called nausea in our land, and it is a pain that comes in various members, and then spreads from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And already I have seen that thing which I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been rubbed for an hour, I saw that inflammation increase thus as if it were a worm growing, and more quickly than it would be if it were silver, thus as if you could see it run from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I put the needle in the pain of that place and fixed it into the muscle, and then I left it there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I ran to the other side of the body until I reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to me that it circulated throughout the body according to what I had seen; and it was very marvelous of the transmutation of it and of the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my wells in the same manner, however I have seen many cases where pain is transferred from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	More pain is seen in the heels as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And it is not thought to be that, but rather it is because of that for which the woman was old, with dry body and uncovered veins, and in this appearance shows the distorted ventilation changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it not appear according to this curvature in those who are delicate and have a humid body with covered veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear at the heel as we have said, but stretch over that and place a ligature and dryness on that until the distorted ventilation is constricted, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	More often if you treat the heels, then cure that with excretion of the body and with that which expels windy humors, and purify those with foul-smelling pills and with pills of serpent and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of arrowheads.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrowheads are diversified according to the species, and according to the locations of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some of them have large points, and small ones, and concave, and blunt, so are solid; and of them some have three angles, and of those to which some have barbs; and of those to which some are tinned.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the passions in which the accident occurs is according to two manners: for the principal members or the main organs, such as the brain, the heart, and the liver, and the lungs, and the intestines, and the bladder, and its similar ones; and therefore when you cut into one of these members and you find signs of death, which cause you to recount nearby, then beware that you avoid extraction of that arrow from those in whom death is seated in the major dispositions, and when you do not appear to have these bad signs, and the arrow is not lodged in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the wound it is when the arrow cuts into it, and penetrates the bone, and there comes out from the siphac, which is above the brain, because it happens through vehement sweating, and sciatica, and vertigo, and pain in the limbs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the speech is greatly hindered and the voice is destroyed, and there comes out from the place of the wound a white humidity resembling pus, and it seems to be attached to the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And thus if this symptom appears to you, then abstain from the treatment and from the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	More symptoms of the arrow when it is in the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and it seems that it has been fixed by a hard cause, and not a hollow one; and for this reason the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and the running of the black blood, and dry coldness, and sweating, and syncope; and thus you will know that death descends in two days.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms when the arrow has wounded the lung are expectoration of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels that are near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient is changed, and they exhale a great amount of foul breath, and demand cold fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow is in the membrane which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the little ribs, and it is made with great and vehement pain and with sighing, and not all the limbs of the muscles are moved.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow is in the stomach, then for this reason the eyes of the wound become bloody and somewhat indigestible matter comes out.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the arrow is lodged in the belly, and it's fixed in him, there will be some wound or tear in the flesh, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for a cure except by extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the arrow is lodged in the bladder, and urine comes out of it, and some cause proceeds from it to the privy parts, and forthwith there is severe pain on the patient, then you should know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	More, the other members like the face, the neck, and the shoulder, and the shoulders and the arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the armpit and the thigh, and their similar members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not touch vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I recommend to you that which I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand for yourself about their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is the cause, for when an arrow struck one man in the tear duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him through the other side, leaving the grey matter of the brain untouched, and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	To extract another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into his body in the thigh area, the eyelid was lifted and the arrow was already hidden and not found except for a small extremity to which it adhered to the flesh, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, made of iron on which there were no feathers.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was happy, and it did not harm his thigh badly, the accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And he extracted another arrow from a Christian man, which had fallen into his shoulder, and it was an Arabic arrow, and this one had feathers; and then he cut around that between two guides, and it was already submerged in the shoulder of the man; and then he was very skilled with that, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And he extracted another arrow from a man which had fallen into his lower abdomen, and they thought that he would die from it; but since after thirty days there was no change in him regarding any of the symptoms, he cut around the arrow and engineered around it, and he was healed, and the accident did not harm him badly.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was consolidated on him, and since he was about seven years old, the arrow reached the root of the hip.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I see a woman to whom an arrow was shot in her lower abdomen, and the wound is consolidated within her, and she does not change her natural dispositions in anything, and the woman does not suffer harm in some of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I see another man to whom an arrow was shot in his face and the wound is consolidated, and the arrowhead remains, not causing much pain, and showing few symptoms of this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes which was shot in the middle part of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrowhead was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to his treatment after the shooting of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow very tight; and then I searched for that with a subtle thread, and did not feel it; but when I touched his right ear, he felt pain, and then I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster to the place with an emplaster that has attractive and digestive virtues, trusting that the place would reveal to me where the arrowhead was, so that I could cut above it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And it does not happen in the location of the significant accident that the arrow has reached that place; and you continue with the plaster on it for many days and it does not happen accidentally; and the wound is consolidated meanwhile, and the patient suffers from the extension of it for a space of many days until one day I feel the arrow inside my nose and recognize that I have it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I apply medicine, acute corrosive, on the wound for many days until it is opened, and with the tent I have probed that, and extracted the end of the subtle arrow, which adheres to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjust in the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until it appears visibly to me the end of the arrow, and passes to my hands with it for the space of time until four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then since the wound is enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I manipulate that, and do not obey excessively, then I do not cease to subtle and ingenious with various ingenious devices, until one day I hang them from the ceiling with a device of ingenious contraptions, according to the shape of those in the end of the chapter, until I extract it; and then I restore the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and yet it is restored, and the wound is consolidated, and health is given to the patient through complete healing, and nothing remains in them for any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some sayings for which pauses this rule and significance about what has not been said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not comprehended with narration nor do they comprehend it freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisan compares little to few; and what is present to what is absent; and finds new operation and new instrument for the descent of the strange causes of the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not extracted from the members in which they are fixed except in two ways: either by attraction of the place in which it enters; or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is thrown by the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding to a fleshy place, and is attracted and extracted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the evacuation of the hour in which it is retained, then it is good that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes putrid, and the attraction of it and its egress are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if the condition is fixed in the bones and does not obey your treatment, then leave that for some days and repeat that with traction and massage each day, and already it has been driven out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your treatment for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow on that bone of the entire affected part with a subtle taravel so that the area of the arrow is amplified, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears to the patient some of those accidents which are said and told, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave it until the blood is being evacuated for some days; because if the arrow perforates the diaphragm, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not fixed but only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the diaphragm, and the patient remains for some days, and none of those accidents happen to him, then put your effort in the traction of the arrow and in the traction of him.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	More so if it is deeply fixed and does not obey your extraction, then you administer taravels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and carefully cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already lodged in the part of the body, and it is lodged in the sentiment, then you inquire about that sensation, and if you feel that, then draw out that arrow with instruments suitable for the attraction of it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot operate on it due to the contraction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are neither bones nor nerves nor veins here, then make an incision on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it has reached the ears on which it is held, then cut the flesh in which it is embedded with all the skill you can; and operate above that, if you cannot operate on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting of those until it comes out.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use your hand with twisting and force on all parts until it makes that come out; and proceed with subtle subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and is made subject to your difficult attraction of it and its extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on that at your hour, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in the area of it can be cleansed, and then return to that which has been alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if you find an opposing flow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in the previous chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And beware of your skill in cutting veins or nerves, or cords, and administer with caution in every way possible to avoid the removal of the arrow; and do this with ease and tranquility and slowness and firmness, as you have been advised.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore make the arrow contract so that the patient is in a position according to the figure according to which you must remove the arrow from them, for it is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are thrust out by the opposite part of the body, or that already proceed from one part to the outer parts, or that make swelling of the extremity of the arrow due to sensation of the part plus close to the adjacent region and many times that same painful spot; then you will cut above that; and let the incision be according to the quantity in which the forces take hold; and then pull out that, for it is made easier by sensation.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the iron according to the opposite direction that the arrow presses into the bone, and insert the tongs, and then extract that.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then insert a tube into where it will be.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the wooden part of the arrow is in it, then remove it with water.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	More if the wooden part has fallen and you want to administer an injection, then introduce it, if it is narrow, push with a blunt instrument so that it enters the cavity of the arrow shaft and remove it with water.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is hollow, then push it out with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is relieved by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then take out all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then treat it with water that is suitable.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is near so that you can touch it with your fingers, and it is possible for you to feel it, then feel it carefully and beware of cutting a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then dress the wound if it is necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of the forces where the arrows are thrust:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their extremities are like a bird's beak which are made with a saw when they grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those are made many special remedies, large, small, and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its poverty, and of the width of the wound, and of the constitution of the patient.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of an implant concave to this hollow extremity, made like a bird's feather so that it alleviates the entry of the arrow in it, and push of the dull part:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of an implant for a dull extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like a branch so that the entrance of it into the arrow's hollow is alleviated and it is implanted with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy, of which it is customary to perform phlebotomy, including: the two pulse veins that are near the ears, also known as temples; and two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the eyes, called aspicientes; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two guide strings that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and two veins that are on the upper lip; — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are under the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	More veins that are called fleubotomadas in the arms are found; one of them is a cephalica, and it comes from the silvestre vein; and the people call it "la vena del cap", which is the middle vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalica; the people name this vein "vena de tot le cors"; the basilica is the vein that is found in the domestic latz, and is named "citillar" by the commoners, who also call it "vena del ventre"; the funis of the arm is placed above the elbow, and appears manifestly above the poutz; there's also the salvatella, which is the vein between the auricular finger and the smallest finger, found in two ramps.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of them is the one that is behind the curve of the knee, coming from the silvestre vein; and the second is the sophena, which is found in the leg near the domestic vein; and there's also the sciatica vein, found in the leg near the silvestre vein; and in the leg there are other similar veins to these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The junction of the veins that approach the ears is the cause of catarrhs, migraines, and sahaftias, as well as ulcers and wicked ancient afflictions of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of applying those bandages is according to what you have recommended to me: that the head of the patient should be rubbed, and the head of the patient should be touched at the occipital bone where the two veins are, with a gentle massage; then tie the patient's neck with a bandage so that the ears and the places of their pain appear, and apply them to the two depressed areas of the head; and look for that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of that with your finger, then touch it gently.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the surgical knife, and this is the one that is inserted, and then insert it into the vein in the area where the blood flows to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then elevate your hand with the vein and the area to the divided parts and cut the vein with an incision in an incising manner.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the amount of two fingers adjusted or around that, and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then tie with a poultice and bind it so that it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already in the beginning of the book, the incision of those things and their cauterization have been described.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples of youth, due to an old and poorly treated migration, is a disease of frequent and painful eyes and body with acute and flowing superfluities.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing that phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient, sit with their back straight so that the two veins appear at the sentiment for a visible and manifest demonstration, and then you will feel it with your finger.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the skin over the vein to the parts of the thumb, and insert the phlebotomy needle, and raise the vein in its place; and cut that one just as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the patient, and place your thumb over the vein for an hour, and then place a poultice on that spot and strengthen it with a strong bandage, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the memory of them has been preceded, and by those, the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the treatment.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Therefore the procedure of phlebotomy from the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient facial ailments and for migraines and painful and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; thus it is that the patient stretches out the arm with a bandage on it so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the pointed tip of the lancet at the head of the instrument on that vein and strike it with a pin or other device in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; and then release the pressure from the patient and hold it tight so that it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some veins are opened with phlebotomy on the side, however it is not necessary that the phlebotomy be of the acute extremity like the others, but rather of the broad extremity, and perform the phlebotomy according to the transverse, because the bone is nearby and the ligament is strong in it, where the phlebotomy is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More specifically, the procedure of the two veins that are like the tear ducts of the eyes for the scabies of the eyes and for pain and pus in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient should hold the vessel with a bandage, and approach the bloodletter to those, and you stand above the head of them.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And let bloodletting be done according to the crosswise length a little above the bloodletter a little, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the bloodletter is subtle, then the extremity of them is cut.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and stop on that cut, and hold it with a bandage, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More, the bloodletting of the vein of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and vehement cough, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and redness that occur on the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting of them is that the patient should hold the vessel with the neck and approach your left hand to their nose, and take a subtle lancet and put it in the middle place of the nose according to the straightness, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and so the blood begins to flow at once.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Take care that you touch your hand to the bloodletting little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then tie it with a bandage, because it is restored lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	More often the treatment of phlebotomy of the arms leads to a restriction of flow and a commencement of scabies and a manifestation of various maladies and putrid infections and bad corrosive ulcers, like herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that the patient holds each one in their hand with a bandage; and let the artisan be above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then perform phlebotomy on the vein with a long, small, and ample needle, little by little; and extract blood in a tempered quantity or according to what is needed, as necessity dictates; and then perform a similar operation on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then release the bandage and hold both veins with a moderate pressure so that the patient is not suffocated, and let them enter their bed where the wound will be healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the treatment of phlebotomy of the Algerian veins alleviates small aposthems and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and in the region of the anus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of those is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck with a bandage, and then uncover their lips and examine both veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of them, and moreover it is because in the region of those there are small black veins; and then you make an incision on each one by making a cut.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Mainly if doubt exists in you, and you do not know which of those is the case, then understand the most serious incision of those, and the most evident of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make a likeness of the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Mainly, it is customary to incise the two veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Mainly, of the two veins that are below the tongue, the procedure is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic, for affections that are in the throat, to the sickness of the uvula, and to sicknesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that it follows the sickness between your hands in front of the patient, and raises the patient's tongue, and looks at the back of the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is declaring to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; and beware that you do not cut your hand while phlebotomizing those, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the body are in which it is customary for all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods: either they put on the phlebotomy knife or lancet a subtle thread; or they tie with the phlebotomy knife, and apply it if it cuts neatly, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And in this way it is convenient to make a section of those very special, thin and subtle things according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of bloodletting mirror or  Method of venesection technique:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is necessary to cut the patient's vein several times, and it is convenient to open the concave full veins that appear gross, and also those that contain thick, turbulent blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of venesection of the olive tree:  or And this is the method of bloodletting for someone named Olivar:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting is of lesser latitude and of purer subtle extremity, and it is convenient to perform venesection on subtle veins that contain subtle, citrusy blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Most especially the youth of the venesection of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins:  it extracts the blood of illnesses that are left in the throat and the neck, and also that which descends to the chest and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is convenient for the bloodletter, when performing that venesection, to be careful with that and to be above fear of that, because if he misses and hits the artery during the puncture of the bloodletting, he will wound the artery and cause an outflow of blood, so that it is advisable not to perform that bloodletting with a piercing instrument, but rather with a cutting one, in the manner described.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear through obvious manifestation, then it is advisable that you leave that one and move to another, or seek some other branch of it; or make an incision in place of the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and apply a poultice to that with an incision thus as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to make an incision on the middle of the arm, then advise against constriction of the arm that touches the place where you join the place of the pulse, and apply a bandage on the thin part; and apply a ligature on the arm and make an incision with a concave section on the vein with a poultice thus as we have said; and beware that the percussion does not affect some space of the place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, with the ligature still in place, inflammation on the spot where you applied the bandage, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore evacuate that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing in the incision like that of a child's urine, and the blood is thin and reddish, then know that it is arterial blood; and then touch and pause your finger on that spot for a long space; and apply pressure with your finger, and if the blood stops, because many times stopped blood is congealed, then tighten the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Watch over the patient's urine, and be very careful with it and do not let them drink it for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the blood does not stop, and you see that there is no medicine present to treat it, then you should cut the artery if it appears to you; because the limb is constricted and the blood is stopped; or you can use a tight bandage, and make a plaster, and take one cloth and bind it tightly over the area of the vein with strict ligature and with pulvils between the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then treat that with the treatment of which it has been previously mentioned in regard to the place of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And stopping the blood from it is difficult in many cases due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of loosening of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	From the black vein, phlebotomy is a procedure that removes blood from the upper part of the head and the right side of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And warn the one who performs phlebotomy to be careful with it, because there is a nerve; and if they make an error in the puncture of the phlebotomy and hit the nerve, it will cause stupor to them, and it is difficult to heal, and perhaps they will not be completely healed. And this nerve appears many times to sensation; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and does not appear, then warn that you should make the phlebotomy with which you cut the vein of the one who has been injured, and avoid the nerve with your skillfulness.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then make an incision in the length of the vein.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and relieves the ailments of the veins.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And consider this specifically, if you want to perform phlebotomy with an olive-shaped lancet or a myrtle-shaped one; because it is the safest of all veins, since it does not harm the artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	It is more advisable for you to perform phlebotomy that you be careful with the lancet so as not to puncture only the head of the ligament, and seek the easiest location, and do not harm it, unless it is confirmed by the primary percussion that there are several visible signs on the area where the phlebotomy will be performed.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, it is often the case in some men, that when they are not phlebotomized on the primary percussion, there is no harm in that swelling.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the phlebotomy of that and its accidents are so many, in which you should consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing to consider is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for hope of it and caution of the occurrence of ailments, and that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, cubital and basilica; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter near digestion, when there appear signs of repletion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let a phlebotomy be performed on the third day or at the first hour after three hours have passed from the beginning of the illness.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more phlebotomy that is administered, the more it provokes convenience and necessity for it, either at night or during the day, at all hours and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is advised that children who are not yet fourteen years old should not be bled, and a pregnant woman should not be bled except from the fourth month to the seventh, and the elderly who have already passed sixty years should not be bled.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be bled for any reason, it is advised that they cleanse their intestines before the bleeding with a warm enema or suppository, if there is retained fecal matter, so that the veins do not attract the superfluities during the bleeding of the pure bowels, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those who are nauseous, or have a fever, or diarrhea, nor those with illness or inflation until their humor is reduced, nor the disease of dropsy, and more so that bleeding should be avoided in case of colic passion and vomiting, and abdominal pain, and multiplication of coughing and fatigue and exercise of fasting or vigilance and all causes that dissolve virtue, either corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider in subtlety of humor discharge whether the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medicine if it is possible for them to take it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or it is excited by some exercise so that the blood is thinned.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the phlebotomy on them in the vein of the arm, at around the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And it is necessary that the arm of that person be protected on that day from all bad animal accidents, as well as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as effort and excessive sorrow and concern for them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in their presence, show the causes for the use of that which is customary among men with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things to them according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the one performing the phlebotomy sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the blood from the arm, and let the phlebotomy practitioner press with his hand two or three times; and then tie the ligature with a strap and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the narrowing is moderate, because the narrowing when it is not excessive, or the narrowing is with superfluity, then prohibit the flows of blood; or it is with softening, and then also prohibit the body from excessive blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Then apply the narrowing, so that one who should be bled, rubs his hands together between them inwardly so that the veins are inflated, and declared to feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the one who performs the bloodletting anoints his hand with a little ancient oil properly; and then places his right index finger on the vein, above the place where he wants to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein is a bit swollen, and the percussion is slowed down because of the veins it is the one you touch thus like a cord that flees from the bloodletting, and of those it is full of wind; and when you apply the bloodletter on that one it is contracted from the bloodletter, and the one who performs the bloodletting is discovered; and the bloodletter does not press on the vein, and if it does, then it is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, for this reason, it is necessary that the one who performs the bloodletting be firm and skilled in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then stop the bloodletting, unless the vein is opened in a good place, if so, it is; and if not, you will make another incision in that area with a small knife or above the hand with a ligature, if the area is not infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is infected, or the patient is spasmodic, then you will leave it alone for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because the strong tension would cause an infected abscess, nor enter into bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then proceed with the bloodletting if it is necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow, then proceed with the bloodletting in that vein according to direction and adjust on the perception a small needle, and make it with a ligature before the area becomes infected, because the area becomes infected in many men due to little perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Unless the area has already become infected, then do not proceed with it, because it does not excuse any cause of yours; and stop on that particular part of the olive oil bandage, because it alleviates the body from the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place to use olive oil than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, administer an ointment of oil in the entire phlebotomy area where the phlebotomies cut the veins of the body, and make a tyriacal paste with sagzenea when it is placed on one of those areas, so that the blood is thinned out and revolves when it is coagulated.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the area of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, because many wounds are caused, and especially to that which has not been bled but rather wounded, or in the area of the small vein, then you should take a sponge, soak it in water and salt, squeeze it out a little, and apply it for an hour, so that it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And cover so that it touches the sentiment of the blood of that vein with the complement of it or of another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if a black or greenish color remains in the area for some days, do not be concerned; and if you want, apply on that area some cause of aloes or of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or of chamomile or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many wounds and abscesses and swellings of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then stop your hand over that, and if you find softness there, apply compression, for the protrusion is bad and evil; and be careful not to press on any area that might cause what we've said, because the flow from the artery will be strong.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a plaster for that which is affected by the condition, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take out blood from the man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears on the blood, as it seems.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then you should let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if you see it thick, then you should let it flow out until it becomes subtle; and similarly if it is sharp, until the sharpness of it is blunted.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for the one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a single occasion, that the phlebotomy of the vein should be amplified and the phlebotomist should be skilled.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in one who is frail, the opposite of that should be done, and take out blood in multiple occasions, and that the treatment should be strict.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from flow of blood and injury to nerves, and it is more gentle and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to the one who is accustomed to faint during phlebotomy, and it is good that you cure that beforehand with phlebotomy with a little of warm water infused in the way of milky grains or simple oxymel; and extract from the blood in three or four withdrawals.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold condition, then take beforehand the phlebotomy with an infusion of syrup of myrrh or in syrup of honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or in flavored syrup with a pleasant smell.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs during phlebotomy, and it is caused by the issuance of much blood, then it is good to take a drink of warm water and syrup with a subtle pleasant smell; and use aromaticity with some sort of oil, and anoint the chest with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And he who wants to evacuate his own arm and dissolve his own blood a second time, take from him of which the flebotomy is for motivated evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, that evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	More whoever wants to evacuate his own arm and spill his own blood a second time, and his body is strong, then do this close to the seventh or ninth hour of the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But whoever wants to attract the blood of the body against the part where it declines, take that it be evacuated on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is much blood already has been scarred and is sharpened and causes fever to rise, take that it be bled of its blood in one occasion and that a great quantity be taken from the bleeding and the aperture be amplified while the syncope increases, since you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and put your hand on the pulse of the body where the blood is, so that death does not occur in place of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not attempt when you wish to release the arm and evacuate the second vein, since the orifice of the vein is already closed and it is difficult to extract blood, that you press on it with vehemence and the vein is extended and curvated, for this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Having the lancet enter so that it is a secondary bloodletting; or remain with the sharpness of the lancet that coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or apply to it tyrical plaster, or of sage, and compress with gentle compression until the blood comes out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then let it be and do not touch it until the inflammation is seated.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then bleed that one on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "cord of the arm" is bled at the place of the cubital or basilic, when they are not blocked or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the bloodletting of it is that the patient dips their hand in cold water so that the vein becomes more apparent and the blood vessels become visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then tighten it over that limb with a moderate stricture; and then make an incision according to the transverse section, not along the width nor along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the opening be wide and let your incision be such that you make a small one on the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is stopped, then put the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from warming the hand in water, and it is enough to soak the body in warm water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the incision of this vein is less dangerous than that of all the other veins, because it has neither a pulsating vein nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the incision on the little vein of the right hand is beneficial for diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of this incision is that you should hold the hand with a ligature or with your own hand, after you have soaked it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and is demonstrated to the eye; and then make an incision transversely; and if you cut not too much, nothing will hurt.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to touch your hand to the incision site of the flesh, because you should leave the nerves of the dissected parts bare.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And immediately put the hand in cold water and let the blood flow in it, because if you do not put it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the quantity of necessity, then you apply oil and salt on the vein, so that it is not consolidated too quickly; and similarly you should do in every other vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	More, the youthful benefit of the incision on that of the left hand is that it is suitable for the ailments of the thigh.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the incision of the groin as you have done in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the saphena vein from the incision is for the ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as those of the mother, and retention of menses, and for the ailments of the kidneys and ulcerations of the thighs and legs, and similar things for the ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the incision of it is that the patient should put their foot in cold water and make a friction on which the veins appear; and tie above the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein I will make apparent by lifting the big toe, and from there it branches out to the surface of the foot, with many roots.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, we will make an incision in the abundant flesh on the thigh or place a bandage around the ankle to restrict the flow of it, because it is better and healthier.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you make an incision on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are located under the surface of the foot, and place your scalpel with which you make the incision across, as if you wanted to cut through.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the incision be visible.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the patient's foot in hot water and let the blood flow into a container until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the one performing the incision errs in the first vein, then cauterize the incision with a little salt, because the area is healthy; and do not fear the harm, but beware of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, make a siphon from the vein of the other foot to draw out.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And from the sciatic vein, the area as we have said is behind the ankle towards the hollow of the divided forest/thigh.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the dressing of the incision on them is with a bandage when it is for cauterized blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that they enter into a bath, and tighten and strengthen the thigh of the patient from the side of the wide intestine upwards under the heel upwards four fingers with a long subtle bandage, which does not appear except for that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, the fleubotomia is thus according to each engineer that is possible for you and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise this by incision or cut this by cutting, because the place of the patient is salty.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in dead men a mortified member; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then the fleubotomia takes some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot near the said auricular and anular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and make flow from the blood the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the tension and place above the location of the fleubotomia cut and strengthen the location, because gentle handling is health.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of flatulence and of the qualities of using those things.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Flatulences are of corns, or of blood, or of bile.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Venozation is performed according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is venozation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this venozation without scarification is according to two methods, either with heat or without heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the venozations that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations on the body, among which one where venozations are placed is in the hollow of the head, and it is the last part of the neck; and the middle location is inside the two parts of the throat together; and venozations behind the jawbone are below the mouth; and venozations of the two spines; and venozations of the armpit, which is at the end of the arm; and venozations of the two elbows, which are on the two arms; and venozations of the two legs; and venozations of the two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And venozation does not extract blood, but rather from the thin veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not retain virtue through them, just as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that venozation be performed with heat or without heat in any disease caused by excess, until the body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessity provokes evacuation due to illness or continuously, administer it every hour at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This cause is why in some men blood is multiplied inside them so that they indicate a need for evacuation through purging and find gravity and swelling in their head; and of those it is that find fullness and pain in their face and head, and in their neck; and of those it is that find bitterness in their face and darkness and dimness in their eyes; and of those that affect the place of their purge; and of those it is that their urine is multiplied; and of those it is that find a taste of blood in their mouth, or that their tongue is infected and spits out blood; and of those it is that their sleep is increased, and of those who vomit blood while sleeping, pain and fevers and plagues and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And then when in any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command purging to be done since two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	Purging of the nape is that when it brings gravity to the head and adds to what is poured into the eyes; but it is good that there be an appropriate evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this swelling is in the place of bloodletting of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use on him that which is of cold complexion, or in which there is a cough, because it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason one should not use that on the old people, and on the heads of whom cold maladies are.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More so to the one on whom it is continuously applied, forgetfulness is caused; and for this reason it is advisable that you order the sweeper to put his hand lightly on the swollen area near the divisions of the joints, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Greater swelling of alkohl is in the place of bloodletting of the dark vein and the basilic vein: and for this reason it is advisable for asthma, and for the constriction of the spleen and the division of the strument of the spleen, and for coughs, and for flatulence.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is advisable that the alkohl swelling be wrapped a little, because if it is left untreated, it generates debility in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the swelling of alhagdahan is good for accidental pains in the head and for ophthalmia, and for migraine, and for forehead pain, and for pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of bloodletting of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And command the assistant that they do not press their hand with a scalpel so that the artery is not cut and acrid bloody fluxes are not caused.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the assistant will put a cold compress on the mouth, for corruption of the gum, and for symptoms of illnesses that are in the mouth, and they are in place of a flebotomy of herbs that are in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	More, the application that is made on the two spatulas of a compress, which is made for replenishment of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the application of the two parts divided from the focuses of a compress, made from the flebotomy of three veins, which is of the basilic, fusca and cephelic, because it draws blood from all those thin veins that are in the flesh, and those thin veins of the other thick veins so that the attraction comes to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the assistant that they do not proceed too much with the scalpel, because the area is devoid of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is an application on which the application is made to the bones and compresses the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers, also.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And command the ventoser to make a large incision, and let it be of iron, because the place indicated by strong sweating; and strongly let the subtle incisions be made with a scarifier and let it be scarified with a scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Lesser incisions of the smaller legs manifest for lesser reason, because they hold the blood of the whole body, and they increase ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and they increase bothor and edema; and they are in the place of phlebotomy of two sophas, and of two caverns, and of two calvings.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Therefore, a motor affects the whole body and causes syncopes in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the incisions, the youth is given to the youth from the incisions of both thighs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the incisions is that they stop the incision at the beginning of the vein and they suck with tempered suction, and do not prolong the position of the incisions, but rather lift them gently, and remove them carefully, and that the humors come to the place by gentle arrival.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened, swollen and inflated, and that the rigor of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and extract the pus little by little, and then consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man who has tender flesh of sparse pores, beware that you scarify him only once and not repeatedly, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the bloodletter to amplify the scarification and penetrate a little deeper, and apply the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is coarseness in the blood, then beware that you scarify twice, because in the first instance the pathway of refinement to the blood and its clarification are opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More so in the second one to the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then let the third scarification be done for the purpose of purging the dregs.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And moderately, when we want to extract a little blood or a small amount, one scarification is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we will scarify with many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that we scarify with deep scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the limit of scarification is where the depth of the vein alone is involved.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person whose skin is thick, hard, and dark, and their pores are very tight, it is good that the places of the blisters be treated with soothing, opening, and resolving remedies; if it is in summer, then use oil of almond or oil of violet, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of gum of the coja tree; and if it is in winter, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of sage, and apply these to similar areas.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the swelling is thick and cold, then let the oil be of marjoram, or of balsam, or of almond, or of anise, and apply it to similar areas.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	More so if the blistering is of open pores with tender flesh, then it is advisable to prohibit oil, and it is good that for these places of blisters a warm or cold water bath be applied, either with saltwater, or with water of coja tree, or with water of borages, and similar things to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose wound is of moist humidity, wash their blisters with sharp vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumach, and apply similar things to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And from that of which the excesses are gross, wash their ventouses with wine vinegar, or with water of sage, which is majorana, or with decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to their similarity.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is advisable that the ventousation be kept from in front of the bath; also advisable that it be administered just before entering the bath for an hour or two, and advisable that they sleep next to the ventousation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that should be regulated so that a bloodletting is done before the ventousation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is advisable that you consider at the beginning: then if the one who is to be bled or the one who must be bloodletted is bilious and has a hot and inflamed blood, then it is advisable that they take cooling causes, such as milgranas acetosas, and endivia in bitter wine and laytuguas, and secamabin, and julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them to eat dishes such as poultry, and meat of small game birds, and cooked dishes with sour sauces, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And from that of which the complexion is cold, it is advisable that they take in drink syrup made with almonds, or syrup of almond seeds, and sumac, and rose water, and odorant spices mixed well between old and new; and that it be commanded to them to use a small amount of drinking and eating, and give them dishes of game birds and hemp seed and sparrows and small game birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is known that on the day of venesection and phlebotomy the patient's urine should be more abundant than their food intake.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is known that a drink should be given in some hours to some men tyriac almond, or musk medicine, which is musked, or citrate, before venesection or before phlebotomy or after, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is thinned; and it is not known that they take that scaldfish.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	The best venesections that are made by scarification are those that are applied on the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the areas of the joints, and the pit of the arm, because these members do not suffer from scarification on themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought for those but attraction of blood from a member, thus as they apply venesection on the breast in illness of blood flow of the nose; and they use that to dissolve cold viscosity of the member, thus as they apply on the belly and the navel; because that rarefies the member and calms it and alleviates the pain when they resolve the venosity.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied on the joints when there is opacity or pores, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out the opacity and eradicates the pores from their place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	It seems similarly when it is paused over the liver and the middle where bloating is given in those enclosed spaces.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these bloated areas are administered with suction only; and some swollen areas are administered with heat from a fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some swollen areas are administered with warm water in the illnesses of the abdomen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is because the swelling is filled and becomes larger, it is warm water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been cut for that purpose.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of swelling administered with heat: let the width of the orifice be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the poultice be the size of a palm; and let it be on the side of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the size of it, the hole being small according to the quantity that an needle enters into it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of bitter rue or citron, with thick margins, lion, kneaded and turned so that it does not let the member fall from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let there be in the middle of it a transverse rod of rue or of iron, where a candle is placed at the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this swelling should be greater than the one we have described; and the smallest part of it according to the illnesses and the age of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the flatulence of the elderly and thin people is different from the flatulence of the young and those with fat bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of treating this flatulence with fire on the member is that it extends the stick with fire decently in front of a small candle made of wax, and place that on the middle of the transverse vein in the middle location of the flatulence, so that the fire is kindled around the affected part to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed on the member of the patient, and the aforementioned is applied on the hole that we have mentioned, until when we have flatulence and do not indicate that it obstructs the aforementioned and that the vapor exits through that hole, then the flatulence will be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And apply the stick according to its manner, and repeat it if symptoms of that condition are indicated.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	There is also a type of flatulence that is administered in the disease of spleen, with water, in which there is no transverse vein or hole, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member alone.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this flatulence, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in many members but in the members in which it is not possible to apply cups, due to their smallness, such as the foot and gum and adjacent areas; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the said nose and its adjacent areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found to be bloodletting in the arteries of purified and clean blood.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then let the daytime and nighttime be passed in arterial blood until they are hungry, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then let the body be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and with cupping; and then let the member of the patient be rubbed until it becomes red; and then let them be placed upon it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and fallen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck from the place with a cup, it is more desirable in treatment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with sour wine and then with hot water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed out.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the blood is prolonged due to the removal of the bloodletting, and it is that which flows back, then you put on a cloth dipped in cold water, and place that over it until the flow is stopped.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the blood is multiplied, then powder the vitriol trissat, or galls and similar things according to the stiptic causes, until the blood is dried; or place the plaster of roasted and ground favas on the area, and let them stay until the favas adhere to the spot, and thus the blood is dried.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And remove, if necessary, the repetition of bloody fluxes, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the bloody fluxes are prohibited from suspension, then rub the area with recent blood or stick a needle in the spots until blood comes out; and then let them be placed, for they will sense some blood as soon as it is absorbed.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall, powder a little ground aloe, or salt, or ash, over those, and apply as needed.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the project of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is of many seen necessities in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and of accidental dislocation in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Or, son, know that they mock this chapter, foolish doctors and the vulgar, and those who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read from them a single letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Because of this cause, it is made that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and you do not forget it at any time, nor do you abandon what you learn, but rather through lengthy reading of the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of those, until you extract the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience has passed; for I have abbreviated it for you and others, and freed it from the burden of length; and I have abbreviated it at the end of the abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of the declaration; and I have formed in it many forms of the remedies that are administered to it, as is done by addition of declaration, just as it was done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the fractures of bones, from which a preliminary discussion is necessary, before we begin the reminiscence of fractured members and diverse things of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	It is fitting that we say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which, at the beginning, the artisans are forbidden and a stop is put on the truth of those; so it is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art, other than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus I say that when there occurs a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fall, then it is advisable to begin with phlebotomy or to remove that, or whatever seems appropriate at the same time, if no cause prohibits it, such as debility of virtue, or if it happens to an infant, or to someone in decrepitude, or during a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and meat of birds and crab; and forbid gross meats and filling up on foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are secure from aposteme caut, and if you do not fear an effusion of material to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Then return the patient to their primary regimen, in which their custom usually runs.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And thus when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is advisable that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of nourishment, soft and light in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from whey, and broth, and cabbage, and peas, and cow stomachs, and marrow, and fresh fish, and similar foods, and with this regimen there is made a coagulation of the fracture and a soothing and mending.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And it is known that the brittle bones, when they are in the old men who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continued and consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of the limbs of theirs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature for a long time by the desiccation of those limbs, and they continue and consolidate those that are of theirs at the end of childhood, just like the bones of small infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But my emperor's nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of any part a similar cause to glue in which there is grossness that adheres and strengthens that thing so that it is conglutinated and tied together, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prohibit it from its functions.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that you apply the dressings to the patient, dressings in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Motion of a fracture varies according to the diversity of the member (or limb).
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you should come with the remembrance of the entire species of fracture, explained in the seventh distinct chapter apart.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There is a diverse multitude of fractures in this medicine.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fractures of the bone are diversified in their medicines; for there is made a curved fracture and another that occurs in the stars; and some seen are made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and of the astragali and the proceeding and non-proceeding, thus as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each species has its own proper engine or torment in restoration of the thing, according to what will come from remembrance of the distinct in the seven places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is recognized a fracture of the bone: it is crookedness of it, and of that prominence and apparentness to feeling, and so from it when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And then when there is not in the place a visible crookedness nor does it seem so, you should touch with gentle touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is not fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is a twisted or small fissure, therefore it does not fit that you put your hand on it and compression of all; meanwhile pause over them with the medicine of which you have remembrance, and apply it strictly to the location for subtle tightening.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know the location when it is curved and not divided into two or other things that do not happen in the satire, as the whole part of its comparison is re-measured, then it fits that you start from your time to rectify the aforementioned thing that happens to the place with an apostema cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it happens to the place an apostema cautery, then let it be for some days until the apostema stops; and apply a poultice according to each manner that you are able to make of lightness and of art.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that the restoration of it and the reduction of it is better than the operation on the bone in which the accident happens.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to what will come from its remembrance.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More so if the bone is satiated, then it is necessary to extend this broken member of two parts, whether it's the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And let your position be where you hold the limb in its natural shape, while the extended parts of the member are trembling, then you will perforate to make the additions return to their place and according to each manner that you can put them in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength so that you do not fall on the patient during the operation, nor cause harm; and perforate yourself according to your own power that you apply one bone to another as their best companion according to their natural forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is convenient that at that time you touch with your hand, and if sometimes here there is a different cause, rectify it and adjust it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, just as foolish doctors do, who cause abscesses or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen happen through the operation of their foolish treatments.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connect, then equate and perform a decent operation and strictness on that member, and give rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make them avoid moving it during their watchfulness and sleep, and observe its revolution and agitation, and control its egestion, and control all its movements with all its virtue; and wait until the position of the member is a position in which the pain is ensured, which is why when one feels pain in the disposition of the position of the member or the injury; then it is convenient to change that to another disposition in which one does not feel pain; and guard that the position of that one is straight and equal, so that the member does not incur crookedness when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil member is that which you should recommend; because you should know that the constricted members are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the elbow, it seems that the covering should be of a very thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, such as the thigh or the leg, it seems that in them there should be a hard and tight bandage, because the tight binding connects the large member and strengthens it entirely with strict constriction, so that in it no abscess enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, then make your evacuation of balance, apply a suitable poultice to that, on the place of that fracture with three bandages or four according to what the member deserves; and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to the most superior part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen it so that you do not loosen the constriction which you have applied to the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen to yourself the bandage of the place of the fracture a little, and loosen the constriction bit by bit, until you take from the place a large part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and envelop the other wounded area around the location with a bandage, and apply it to the affected areas of the fracture; and be your operation in the tightening of the bandage and in softening of that one as we have said in the primary bandage above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then insert a pad of cotton or cloth between the bandages if there is a curvature of the fracture, so that the irregularity of the fracture is absorbed; and if not, do not put anything on it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then put a pad on the other bandage, and absorb onto these decently made bandages as much as there is no inflammation or cautious abscess in the location, then put it on the thing that causes the abscess or the inflammation; and let it be for several hours; and then strengthen with the bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the bandages be of linen cloth of hemp or flax, and be formed wisely; or be of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each bandage be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is fitting that the bandage that is put on that fracture be a bit thicker and wider than the other bandages, and the length of the bandage according to what is suitable for the limb in size and smallness; and then strengthen with the bandages another bandage according to your first tightness; and then loosen it above with a thread decently as we have said regarding tightness, and that should be your tightness according to the location of the fracture itself, and the more it is away from the fracture, the looser the tightness.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and fineness, and be made of soft material; and if the threads are too thick, as has been seen in the operation of certain foolish surgeons who use threads of twisted cord, it is a great mistake, when the tension should be equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And also very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not achieve with tension what you want, and it is not necessary that between this and that there be more than a finger's width.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is treated by applying tension to the extremities of the limbs, then apply it in those places, afterwards place padding made of cotton or flannel so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Certain complicated fractures are with a wound, and accidents occur in the joint, and I will come back to the memory of it in that chapter according to specificity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that every broken limb is not reduced with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that the limb, when it is large, does not require being immobilized by splints unless after some days or weeks or months, according to the security of the appearance of abscess or caution.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the ancient splint-makers by which the Ancients restored them, which were applied to fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	The treatment for a plaster cast for a fracture restoration is suitable for complex wounds and especially for women and children, because it is about something on which no heat or cold is applied: and it is that you take powder of mulberry, and it is the marrow of the flour that you should remove from the movement of the mill in the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And refine that dough as it is, but rather sift it with a sieve of wool, and pause the preparation of it not rough nor subtle; then use that refined one.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another treatment for plaster cast restoration of fracture and dislocation and torsion: recipe of asafoetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is extracted from wild mint, all of one dram; of mirra and aloen one dram and a half; of alochil one dram and two scruples; all crushed and sifted and mixed with water or with wool if the preparation of the patient is ulcerated; then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones gently, and comforts many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another treatment for plaster which you prepare for a fracture and torsion: recipe myrrh and half a dram of white altea, one dram and a half; of mirra and of aloen one dram and a half; of acacia one dram and six scruples; of Armenian bol one dram and twenty.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Let all things be crushed in a mortar with a motivated contraction, and be sieved, and be mixed with water or with white of egg and be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manipulation of plaster to joints and separated bones from their places, and sudden pain happens in those and in cracks and fractures: take a woolen cloth and submerge it in warm oil and vinegar and place it on the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More than this plaster is not the virtue of restoration, but rather to cauterize and expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another manipulation of plaster that restores broken bones: take flour of dried fig and flour of wild poppy; mix everything and make a plaster from it.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manipulation of quick plaster administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining swelling: take roots of lavender, of chamomile and flowers of violets, flour of peas, and all in equal part; let everything be crushed and mixed with wine, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scalded, then mix that with water of colic or humid water and apply it to the area.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another manipulation of plaster more strong in resolution than the first one, when there is a hard swelling for the restoration of the member: take roots of lavender and seeds of lin, and balustia, and melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, of chamomile, all in equal part; let everything be crushed and mixed with water of sage or warm water or wine, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	According to the great Hippocrates, do not apply anything on the third member except for restoration of it, unless made from wax and oil, and no other cause; and recommend that it be moderate between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	In Galen's opinion, it is seen that things are applied on the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is drying with little heat, as well as myrrh, and other seeds similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Manual of plaster that cures lesion and pain: take equally, of wax, of human skin or bear's hair, and of walnut, and salt, divided in equal parts; let them be ground and sieved, and then cooked, and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the quantity according to which you think that the ligament is broken and then dislocated, is that you consider if there isn't acute pain nor swelling nor the bone is fractured it doesn't move from its place, then you shouldn't dislocate it with forced movements.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there occurs at the place violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you should restrain or dislocate it immediately, and apply its plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a cloth of linen and a marine sponge humidified with lemon, and submerge it in warm water, and with this wash the area where the discomfort and pain are located to soothe them; and then let the limb rest for an hour; and then apply a poultice made from oil or rose oil on the affected area submerged in vinegar or oil, and leave it on for nine hours until you are certain of reducing the swelling and letting the inflammation of the limb subside, and the pain be alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a thin and subtle plaster, not too tight for your primary construction, and subtly adjust it to the area until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if at times the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all accidents have been completely alleviated, and you no longer need a plaster or bandage, then apply in this way as you did from the beginning of the treatment.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if none of the causes we have mentioned affect the limb, then do not remove it, but leave it on for three or four or five or six days; and some times all that is left on for twenty days according to what seems right for the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of flesh forms over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then adjust the bandage more tightly in the upper part than in the lower part, and adjust it to the swelling of the patient's wound, according to how the memory of it is recalled.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you have already cleaned and reduced the area of the fracture more than is necessary, then be aware that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; and so wrap it with cold water dressing, which has been watched over for three days; and loosen the bandage a little, and through this operation, restore nourishment to the limb, and it heals gently.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But those foolish restorers of the limb's fracture, who when it is not restored at the beginning, as is necessary, and it is restored according to its curvature, make a mistake in their procedure, and are filled with great fear, and if they were to increase the pain of the Ancients in their free writings and confess that they acted wrongly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this before, for which it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter following: On fractures that occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by a blow to the bone, and the blow strikes all the bone entering the siphac, which is called the bone, thus as it is said in the chest, and because of this the species is named "ascial"; or the blow cuts into one part of the bone, and cuts the flesh of it and does not pass the cut into the back of it; and this species of fracture is named "levatio absoluta".
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the wound of these two fractures is great or small, and the fracture that is confused or bruised; and its cause is a blow with a stone or a fall onto a rock, and similarly to this.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating that approaches the peritoneum which is beside the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And from fracture that is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason it is named this species hairline fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made by a fall or by a blow of stone and similar things, which causes some layer of the bone to enter into the divided parts, and it is made in the concave place thus as accidents happen to the parcels of the brain when accidents happen due to blows and it is separation of their entrance into the divided parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it happens in the bodies of humid bones, like the heads of knees.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these species of fractures are called "suntagia", they are weights such as separated vertebrae.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come to the consideration of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	We recognize all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry of their pain and by feeling of corrupted flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	The species of hair-like fracture is known by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is scraped off, and cleaned with a thread, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that they signify by manifest signification on fear, such as vomiting of anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and distension of the veins and contraction of those, and similar things to them in the major conditions, it is doubtful if there will be healing.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-threatening accidents, then you hope for health, and so you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it has come to you the wounded one at the beginning as it is wounded and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study on the feeling of the bone during the fourteenth day according to every condition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you touch the bone on the seventh day, having that which is said the bone is corrupted by the panicle, and that the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated to the pancreatic membrane covering the brain, and it is divided into thin and fragile parts, then it is necessary to sew the divided and fragile part together, according to what you have learned in your recommendations.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover on the bone according to custom and manner as much as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter for the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you need to make an incision on the bone, or a flow of blood or a cauterized abscess, then you oppose yourself to it with what is necessary, and that you fill the place with warm drinks and rose oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is discharged, and you are secure from flows of blood; and then begin in the circle of the bone and in the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this will be according to one of the two manners of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one manner is that you cut the bone with a cutter of strict so, and this is the shape of it: Then administer another cutter like this, a bit wider than that; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the largest cutter, wider than the previous one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is evident that you should be aware of the names of various incisions, some of which are longer than others; and some of these are shorter than others and are located at the end of the extremities, and are made of iron or felt.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incision so that it does not strike the head and injure it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and strong, then it is advisable that you perforate in the circumference of the tooth with instruments which you call non-deep trephines.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus but because those do not touch the term of the bone of the skull to that which is near it, so that the trephine has a round extremity or edge above that which is placed the head of the pointed instrument resembling an edge or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a large number of these trephines, each of which is suited to the thickness of each bone, while being present in the whole head of the skull, the extremity of which should be pointed, and the length and width should be according to the quantity of thickness of this head.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of trephines: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the trephine on the bone and revolve it with the ties until you know that the bone is already penetrated; then return the trephine to another place, and pause there where everything is pierced the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environment.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then insert the incisors into the incisions that are between each hole of the bone, and make a very subtle pus on it with a touch of levity, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or for another cause due to various instruments which you will prepare for this purpose, like tweezers and subtle forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And take care that you guard with all caution that the incision does not touch any part of the siphacium ( likely referring to a vital area, possibly the diaphragm or another sensitive internal organ).
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus when you have perforated the bone in a circle, and it is separated from the diaphragm if it is continuous with it, and you extract that part, take care to rasp and smooth it in the roughness of its surface, so that it is like the bone itself with another similar instrument to an incisor, but take care that it is more thin and more subtle than the other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If a small part of the bone is broken and cracked, then take it with ease as that which is necessary for your instruments; and then heal the wound with linen and apply the ointments that we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other manual of operation is lighter, far from fear, which is called Gualia and is praised for its great ease; and this is its sermon: necessary for you at the beginning is to begin to discover the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most vehement and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and you have placed your hand on the extremity of this gentle and joyful incision, whose form is this:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular part is smooth and does not cut any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides before in length, thus as veins; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the siphac with the face of the acute incision on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incision of a part with a small hammer until you have cut all the bone with ease, as if it were revolving, and be sure of the pericardium that no accident will occur in the manner that you fear, and even if the doctor was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When a cause is annexed to the bone of the pancreas in any location of the bone, it will affect that part of the body with the extremity of the incision, and it will facilitate the delivery of that which is obstructed, for it is obstructed by its own nocument and its own pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pancreas, and that which is separated or stopped by the bone is the surface of it, and remains in its roughness and subtle scratches, then take care to scrape off that roughness and eradicate those subtle scratches with subtle scrapers, for which you have prepared the instrument, with various quantities so that you can administer them in any location, the most convenient for them and the most suitable for those according to what you understand from your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And take care to administer in your scraper the one with which you scrape the bone from the beginning, the widest of those scrapers, and then use progressively the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do this continually until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small fractures, capillary fractures and subtle fractures, take care to administer cure according to what you have understood for its correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	It is a cause that is not diminished on all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And it is based on what we have written, which has shown us in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the dressing is applied when you have extracted the bone, then take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and apply it to the orifice of the wound; and take another doubled or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and rose oil and apply it over the first cloth and do this as many times as you can without applying too much pressure on the dressing; and administer a latex dressing on it, and do not constrict it except for the quantity that the wound has, only just so.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that on for the treatment for one day or two until you are sure of a mature abscess; and then remove it and administer medicines to those which have superfluous dryness, such as linseed and flour of vetches, and powder of anise and aristology, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make from these medicines a powder that is dusted over the wound, as they are dry; and universally, administer on that all medicine of property such that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware that your skill ensures the plague in your cure is clean; and not in the surdity of ointment nor other; nor do you let virulence aggregate in it; for when it is adjusted on the panicle of the brain, it corrupts that and pours out that, and throws onto the patient a malignant malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it falls on the siphac of the head, as from it is mondified the bone and mainly when the cure of it is hindered, and is blackened on its surface; and then consider that if it falls to the patient the accidents that we have said, you should know that it is perilous to touch.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it doesn't fall blackness but from the medicine that is applied beneath, and it's in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and mix those with a cloth, and place that on the siphac; and place the cure with the species of cure that are convenient until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken but rather two parts together and above them, or one of those with some visible veins, because there are two bones in it, whereas the part below is cartilaginous, and it's not fractured but rather subject to bruising and twisting and bending.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should introduce the small tool into the nose, and you will bind that fracture with the same tool indicating the location, and with the same tool you will push from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your convenience, and be careful that you do not fall during the operation on the patient's suffering.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and the tool does not reach it, then you should cut to the end of the rod on which the enlargement is placed.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same as for this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And take care to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then apply the vinegar or the decoction of the healing plant to the rest of the aposteme.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the end of the nose a thread of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two threads, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be in the thread enough quantity to fill the hole of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers said that the threads should be soaked in borax, and should be applied throughout the day, but it is not seen by me; however, it is necessary that the thread be wrapped in a poultice of honey combined with powdered mallow; and then leave the thread until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes insert into the nostrils certain warm compresses, in place of heat, a poultice made from a mixture of wool and lion's skin; and make sure that you have already applied the fracture of the nose strongly and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to, do it, and if you want to, apply warmth.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if a severe abscess or boil occurs, plaster the nose with wax or with a mixture of melted wax and rose oil, or with a diaculum.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if a severe abscess or boil does not occur, then take care to plaster the affected area with flour of euphorbia and powder of crushed almonds mixed with white album of egg; and place a poultice on the stoppage, and do not bind the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then take care to split apart those, and extract those with instruments that are suitable for those; and place a bandage on the fissure, and cure it with water that nourishes and consolidates, and plaster it with what is conveniently applied.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an ulcer occurs inside the nose, then take care to cure it with warmth and administer suppositories of lead until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter Four.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not a serious wound, consider then if the fracture is only displaced and not broken in two and is curved to the separated parts within, then its union is easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And do this, if the fracture is on the right side, you will insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger of the right hand; and press with that the curvature of the fracture within to facilitate the displaced parts coming together, with your other hand on the outside of the bone; and gently move them so that they come together.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary that you apply extension to both parts according to the correct method until it is possible to bring them together.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if it happens with the displacement of teeth to disruption, then hold those with which you expect to remain firm with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and place a bandage over the fractured jaw, and place a bandage over that one doubled, and place a large sterile cloth decently made, or a single piece of gauze along the length of the jaw; and tie this above according to what seems appropriate for the binding and what is convenient for the application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and stop the food that is harmful to them.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure is already altered in some manner, then take it and separate it from the third day; and then rectify what has been altered of it and fill it with powder of moly, or album of egg, or flour of cypress, since you will have applied the cerate of it, and place on the plaster a woolen cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when the plaster is attached and adjusted on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, so that it is not removed until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for many times observed this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another observed aposteme occurs, then administer what we have often said in the treatment of it until it is healed, and the aposteme is reduced.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is with a wound, then consider if it is a piece of bone separated or fragmented, then you subtly remove those fragments with what is convenient for the remedy of those disturbances.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the edges of the wound are tight, then you enlarge it with a flea-cut according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then return the injured part to its original state, and if it is not fully restored, place a suitable plaster on that area and attach it so that it adheres until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter five.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the hernia when it is strained.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the hernia is ruptured in the division before the navel, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is ruptured, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch the surrounding tissues; and it is easier to restore; or it is such that it touches the surrounding tissues, and it is difficult to restore; or it is such that the fracture is in the wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation on it, when the fracture is in the wound, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the adjunct and follows the ruptured hernia, and the other stretches out the skin with that division.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then shape the fracture with your fingers until its form is made according to what is suitable, and it should not be in a prominent or hollow place.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is suitable that you place a piece of cloth or linen under the patient's thigh, and its size should be according to the quantity of your need; and stretch and elevate the hernia and tie the cloth with your hand until it shapes the fracture as is suitable.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot reach the extremity of the furcula to the divided parts in front, because it has come to the pubic area, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be put on the muscle of their thigh, in its middle part.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of their thigh at the divided parts until the bone of the furcula is elevated that is in the pubic area in its place, and then you correct the fracture and bind it with ties to the thighs.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	More often if you feel stagnations of the furcula and they are swollen, then it is necessary that you make an incision over that area and extract those stagnations with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision on it with one of the incision tools that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had previously placed the furcula under the instrument that serves the ciphac; and the instrument is made of wood or iron, of which this is the form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and let its width be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Measure the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; that it should have two extremities thus at times, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have made when you extracted the abscess from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of gathering pus, then adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear gathering pus, then fill the wound with dressings and poultices according to the quantity of the split of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if there is a gathering of pus, then put on a dressing made with sour wine and rose oil, and apply it to that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone is wounded and fractured, it is that you put a plaster made from wheat flour mixed with white of egg, and apply it to the swollen area, and then apply the splint of the patient's own shirt, if indicated for that, and then take a bandage, which is a long strip, and its width should be about one palm or so; and apply double poultices over the swollen area and the plaster; and take a thin sheet of tablecloth, whose width is three fingers and length similarly; and wrap that in a dressing, and wrap that dressing with the sheet in the place on the place of the fracture; and apply bandage as it is wound, and wind that around the patient's neck and their good arm, and their patient's bad arm, and reduce that all over the affected part, and whenever the constriction of the fractured area decreases, and this is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And you must ensure that the steel is not rubbed against the broken bone; and for this reason, as you visit the patient every day, when the ligament is softened or the steel has been reapplied, then you correct this and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then you stop the patient's sleep by their neck, and place a small cushion under their arm in the night, so that when they are elevated by the assistant on that side, thus the fracture of the shoulder is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or their arm is tied to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not untie the binding unless there is an abscess or apostema in the area, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then you renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that effect, and adjust in the constriction and restore it, and let it be until it is restored and the fracture of the shoulder is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some visits are made at home in less than a month's time of that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter six.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The flat spatula is broken in the left side and it is not the breakage of it, but rather its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And thus when the place of it is broken — and it is broken in the middle of its place — and not joined except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare it and reduce it according to its natural shape in every manner of art that is at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then apply a poultice of ground album of egg to the place, and stop it with a linen cloth; and apply dust of double-folded cloth; and apply on it a subtle plaster made of table or mortar according to the quantity of the spatula, all or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the plaster is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a linen cloth, and apply the plaster equally.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it with a long bandage from constricted binding and from firmness of the plaster, so that it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And check the dressing every day; and all visits that it should be softened, remove another visit and strengthen it and adjust the plaster if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And let the patient lie on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when the name is completed, you dissolve the ligament, and you should be assured that the dissolution is not of the bones, but rather of the cartilage, which is not a serious or worrisome condition.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the skin and put a plaster on it, then cut above it, and remove the splinter, and do as we have said in the treatment of the fracture with a hot poultice of emollient, or apply a cautery if it becomes necessary here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot, having been broken in the middle part of it, and this causes a deformation; but the extremities of the movement are not deformed, rather they are shaken and dislocated.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of it, when the middle of it is broken, it is that it declines to the inner parts and causes great pain, and difficulty in walking, and coughing, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion under their shoulders; and apply pressure to the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two assistants, and proceed subtly in the operation and in the adjustment according to all manner that is possible and convenient for it, until the shape of the bone returns as it should be.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then pause on the plaster and stop and pause above the subtle table of sauce or of warm poultice and of its similar things in lightness, since you envelop that in a cloth; and then subtly apply it to the broken bone so it's not dislocated; and go with the bandage according to the condition of the back some dressed wounds, and strengthen that with a strict dressing; and then consider the bandage at all times, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes a detachment of that which causes corrosion or rubbing, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then touch and detach that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what occurs with the hand of skill of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, if at times it adheres to the face; and adjust to it the strictness within which it will be healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in coarse locations that are near the back; and of their extremities, from the partition in front, nothing occurs to those contrary but because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The recognition of it is not hidden from the sensation that guides the examination of it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it reduces the fracture with the fingers according to the possible method, until it is reduced as it should be, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if necessary for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining into the partitions of the dent, then it happens to the patient vehement pain and puncture, like the puncture that happens to one who has pleurisy, and for this reason the bone puts on inflammation; and it happens difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of bloody mucus; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the medicines are prepared for that with many preparations.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of it they say: it is good that you give the patient foods that cause inflammation and swelling, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed away from the affected parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We would have avoided this for what is not a trivial cause to generate a cold abscess, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then it already helps with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they said some of them that the ventosa should be given and also that it should suck with strength; and it seems reasonable, but however it is feared that the ventosa will attract the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They will say some of these: that the place should be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, which should be the binding plaster when you envelop the aforementioned retortion; and the patient should be treated with a cure of pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the cause creates severe constriction for the patient who cannot breathe, and the bone presses on the vein with a sharp puncture, they should place a bandage over the patient, then they should make an incision on the place, uncovering the broken rib, and place their hand on that instrument which holds the diaphragm in place, the memory of which is preceded, and they should facilitate the bone, and extract that thing.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess forms, then cut it and pour powders in heated rose oil and apply to the place, and the patient should be treated with what is suitable for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him rest on the side where he sleeps, until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter nine.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some wounds imply fracture to the bones of the neck, and similarly injure them, and likewise to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider this: for if the muscles are already softened and numbed and deadened and cannot be moved or stretched or strengthened, and when you constrict them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, you don't feel pain in them, then you should know that it is not curable, and in such cases it is often fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you touch those areas and feel contraction in the fingers and prickling, then you should know that the nut of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see a similar thing in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then examine their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they are already softened, it happens to them as it does in the others, and when you put them on their back, there is loss of control and expulsion outside of their will, and some wounds make them be turned over on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is fatal, and therefore do not bother with their treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	Maybe if none of those things happen, the cause is better and more legible.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of it is that you perform a cauterization on the abscess, placing it on the spine or between the shoulder blades, or in the armpits, for several times a day until the abscess is seated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	Then place one of the comforting and exciting plasters on it, and bind it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the bone slips or any cause that has already been separated from it, then cut on the tendon and show that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with suture if it is large; and then heal that with some greasy ointment, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Maybe if the end of the bone is broken, then cut so that you insert the thumb of the left hand in the anus, and adjust the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second adjustment; and then place on it a plaster and bandage, if needed, and bind it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	If you feel shattered shards in it, then make a poultice on that area, and remove that, and cure the wound with the treatment that is preceded by until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	And if there are fractures in the head, then
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the restoration of the width or On the restoration of the narrowness/stricture/con
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the narrow parts are fragile and fractured, and if they fracture, then the break is not just a communication in the extremities of those but are cut in the length and decline to the separated parts; and it happens to the patient pain in the area and puncture, and the leg is numb when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is above the fracture, which is the shape/form of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you bind it according to what appears to you as proper for binding until it is assembled into its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Moreover, if the fracture is in the long [bone] or that which already declines to the separated parts, then you make the patient lie on their stomach so that it is prepared for you, the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then when you have bound it, put a plaster on it, and place on that a splint of wood or of leather, and tighten with a bandage over which you do not fear puncture of fracture nor movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Engage the cavity with what fills it so that it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their side or over the side of the bed.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If the abscess bursts, then cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place on it what will calm it according to what has been previously said; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it in this way as is suitable.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the hollow bones or they are comminuted, then cease the treatments.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the helper/ assistant (or possibly "of the joint").
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The helper/joint is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, of which one is that you take a wooden splint according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be two ligaments in the two extremities, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And let the patient sit on a chair; and then put the broken arm outside on the splint so that it reaches to the end of it, in the middle place where the curvature of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend the affected limb above the heavy cause, or let the minister extend it to the parts of the hips; and then the doctor should check the fracture with the adjacent hands together, until the fracture returns to its proper place.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient should be lifted above the nape of the neck and the hand of the doctor's assistant should be suspended with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them should hold what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other should hold the pus from the wound; and each of them should extend to their respective part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then pull with a bandage on the fracture and also on that one with another bandage, and each of the two ministers should extend to both their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And thus if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, it is proper that one half of the bandage should be placed on the cilic and the other behind the fracture towards the elbow.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, it is proper that the bandage should be placed on that location and also above the elbow.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Wrap that one with ease and effort, and then as soon as it is wrapped as it is proper and applied with good application, then pull it tight if there isn't an abscessed cut.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	More often if there is an aposteme abscess, then put a strict bandage around the place for eight days, and apply to it a woolen cloth soaked in warm oil and rosewater so that the abscess bursts, and then you will strengthen that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of strengthening that area is to put a plaster on the fracture, and then apply a wrapping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand opened over the shoulder muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And put the cloth and strengthen it around the support of the arm so that the arm is in place of splints, if not prohibited by some cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And put on the fracture that splint which is thickest and strongest of the other splints; and put between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers from the whole part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen around the splints with the bandage that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your bandage on the place of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more elongated, the bandage should be less tight.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And then if you examine the positioning of the stars and the strictness as we have said in the hour in which you restore the member to its natural position, then you do. 
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you suspect a post-stroke abscess, then loosen the tight dressing and insert the metal rods into the affected area as we have previously described.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligature in all parts for three days so that there is no accident in the place of swelling or inflammation; or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to excessive constriction; and thus correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	More so if you are confident that no accident will occur from this, then do not untie the ligature except after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And apply to the injured area a poultice full of warm wool, and consider every hour of the night or day that the shape of the broken member is not deformed or dissolved, or that the ligature is not loosened, so correct all this according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And feed the patient according to the order in which we have previously indicated, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it is fully digested; then increase the quantity of their food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the injury and the bandage of it to be tightened for 40 days; then they should be untied and a bath administered, and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is properly aligned, then you should not remove the dressing and the splints for one or two days.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm bones; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed beside the small one, from the part below.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And it happens that only the larger forearm bone is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller forearm bone is broken below, then the restoration of it is easier, and the healing of it is also easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the forearm bone on the left side is broken, the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm bone below, then it is convenient for the doctor, in order to restore it, to make a small extension with ease so that it can be straightened.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger forearm bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to make a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both ankles are simultaneously sprained, then it is advisable that you apply a more forceful external traction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is advisable that you place the figure of the hand in a way that restores and extends the patient's arm over a cushion, and be the pulse of the hand at the separated parts, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be seated on a low, quilted chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a cushion in front of them at the height or level of their thigh, so that the patient does not have to strain themselves.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then let the assistant extend the arm of the affected part with their hand, or with a bandage, and another assistant similarly extends the other.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor should put the bone back in place so that it is reduced according to the best position that it can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the bone's fracture is displaced, then you should make a perforation to reduce the entire mass in its proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears that the displaced part is separated and the ligament is torn and it's not in your power to restore it, then you should put a splint on it and immobilize it according to the method that we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	More often if the fracture is on the thigh, you have already made a special chapter for it, and so take the cure of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscessed cautery happens at the beginning of your restoration, then anoint a cloth made with wax and white ceruse and oil of rose, and be moderate between thickness and subtlety, and apply the cloth strictly so that the abscess is eased; and then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from powder of ground clay and the clearness of urine, and put on bandages; and let the bandage be the one that is applied on that closed and strengthened fracture.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the name of the bandages of the arm is seen in the major preparations, or it is a fracture in one splint or in two splints together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And apply your bandage strongly on the place of the fracture, firmly and vigorously, and when it is more constricted to the parts above the fracture or to the lower parts of it, loosen the bandage a little softer according as the memory of it is preceded in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not harsh nor rough, and the thread with which it is tied should be moderately of its own proper size between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Examine the limb and its ligament closely for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if a cause arises that requires correction, such as swelling of the limb, then it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then apply the bandage tightly.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the fracture is already loosened and the bone is already realigned and resembles its original shape, then correct all that with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more so if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess of constriction, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little and leave it for several days until it returns to its normal state, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	More so, if to the patient no cause of those that we have mentioned happens, then it is not necessary that it be untied for about twenty days or around that.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its own power of agitated movement, and make it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all that depends on the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter thirteen.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the knee and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	It is known that to the knee and joints of the fingers, fracture often occurs, and it does not happen to them unless rough and violent movements are applied.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when fracture or injury occurs to the knee, then it is good that the patient keeps their leg straight and their heel aligned with their buttocks, and place their leg extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then let the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor anoint those ends that are to be joined with good conjunction.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is good to apply a plaster and stopper, unless an apostemous ulcer occurs; and place a dressing underneath according to the quantity of the location, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More so if the fracture is in the inner parts of the palm of the hand, then make a figure of eight with cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; it should be held with a long bandage.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the dressing be wrapped in cloth in which there is padding, so that the dressing is applied to the palm; and hold it as is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the separated parts of the forearm, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another below the separated part on the palm, so that the hand can be open and straight; and then put a bandage, as if the hand is wrapped with a ligature between the fingers.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs to one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be bandaged according to what is necessary and put a splint on the palm if you want, place a small stick straight so that the fracture is elevated and not bent.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle one, or the index, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be bandaged and tied with a string around the finger itself; or all the fingers should be tied together continuously, which is better; or place on that finger a small stick, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and then apply that, the disposition of a hot poultice and oppose — in your operation — to what is necessary when any of those causes occur, as it is reiterated in the narration of the case.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the hip joint is broken and declared by sensation, according to which it is converted into swelling in front and pus above.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is strengthened over the fracture and another bandage placed below the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and on their face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the minister extends all the bandage to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	More, if it is attached to the root of the hip, then let the bandage be attached to the groove at the part of the perineum, so that the extension comes in order, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the break is near the groin, then let the bandage be made to fit the groin, and let the extension be to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should oil the bone with both his hands so that it reduces to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good joining; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless the limb becomes gangrenous.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	More often if there are gatherings in the abscess, then you should wait for several days until the abscess is evacuated, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The stricture of it should be made thus: take a bandage that you wrap around the fracture, and fold it two or three times, and remove its excess; and then wrap the leg up to the ankle and to the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert the end of the bandage between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the divisions of the joints, and let the ends of the bandage protrude from the division above the two parts, and then roll up onto the leg and the thigh what is excessive from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then put a splint on the thigh in the place of that fracture, and put one of them a splint on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the emptiness between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the stricture is consolidated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start with a strong stricture in the middle on the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you get used to it at the location of the fracture, your stricture should be lesser and more loose and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two extremities of the thigh to the divided parts of the hips until it reaches the hollow of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the legs on the other side so that the ligament is not dislocated from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then put the structure on that, given that it does not cause corrosion or aposteme (infection) to the member, nor cautery (burns) or emflacio (swelling), and if any of those causes occur, then treat it with dissolution, and rectify what occurs, all properly, as we have said many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More so, if there is a piece of bone in the bone that you can remove, then take it out as you are able; and if not, leave it alone and let it heal, and cure with what is previously mentioned, until the memory of it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And several times, this fracture of the thigh is strengthened by other things that are adjusted to its legs, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the restoration of it, in such a way made, it does not cause the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limps because of this.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months or a few years, and all this depends on the diversity of the complications and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone of the shoulder.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the collarbone of the right shoulder is very painful, and more so if it reaches the nervous membranes beneath.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	More so if it reaches the fracture, then it is not just a crack or hole in its divisions, and this can be with a wound or six wounds, and about this all has been stated according to sentiment.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken from its divisions must be united with the words between them, so that it may be joined and conjoined as much as possible by equilibrium and ease and creation.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply a plaster and put it on that round steel, if needed for that condition; and bind it with a bandage to hold it in place conveniently.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the conditions that we have recommended for other fractures, just as it is with apostema and similar to those cases in which one must oppose all accidents to what is convenient for it, until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter sixteen.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large and is named for the leg itself; and the other is delicate, and is named fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And what happens to each of the species of fracture that happens to the two bones of the arm, for this reason restoration is made of it in the same way as restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are fractured at the same time, the leg is turned into many fragments.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thinner bone is fractured, the leg is converted into fragments beforehand.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is fractured, you will find that then, and it is one of those causes that cannot be amended.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extension and alignment and ligature of the bones according to that treatment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But especially beware, if the fracture of the leg is an old and habitual one, that the extension should be less and more gentle, and alleviate your hand.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you straighten the bones and complete the entire operation, then you will take splints of wood from which are placed under the causes that were previously mentioned, and they should be made from branches of palm; choose from those the ones to which a small groove is petitioned, and not be of the knuckles, and let their length be according to the length of the leg, from the knee to the larger one.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each bandage in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one wrap on the front part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and let the end of the bandage enter into the wound at the bottom location of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two sticks in three places of both extremities and the middle place, for in this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right and left sides, and it stays in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a splint of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and let it be placed on it, the leg, so that it conserves that movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And moreover, take care that you do this in a fracture, and when one treats the wound properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the leg and examine it for previous study, and you guard it from apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes happen, then apply to it what is necessary so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 18.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the foot and of the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the heel does not happen total fracture; but to the bones of the foot happens occasional fracture; and to the toes of the foot happens little fracture, and it doesn't happen to them except bruising in the middle of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and those bones need to be elevated above them, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared thus as before.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and press those, and squeeze, and bend those until they turn in the places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and stopper above, and place on the belly of the foot a small table to which are two clamps or clips.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then stretch that on the foot with downward tension, since you have wrapped that on the foot with bandages and other things for which indications are given.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then undo the binding, for you will find the bones bent, or broken, or displaced, and the operation on them is thus as you would conjoin.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some of the said bones are broken, then restore them, and bend them thus as you know and are advised in the restoration of the bones of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be bound with a little bandage; and place on the foot this table that is recommended to you, and stretch it with downward tension.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	More often if it is broken into two or three pieces, then you will place a quantity of it wrapped in lion's cloth on each digit of the foot, and hold the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the legs of the table to make the belly of the foot retain it well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is suitable for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which I have told you about in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and apply this to every accident that suits it.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the knee of the thigh and of the bone of the kneecap and of the rod of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the knee of the thigh is broken, then make that plaster cast in a seated position, and incline it slightly towards the back of the two, a little, and let it be held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And let the bandage cover the knee of the thigh, and be made on the knee of that person like a spear; and let the thigh be bent, and raise the two small ones little by little, until all that is forgotten so that it is seen that the knee is thus as before and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then pause to put powders on their back, and when they want to urinate, hold the container with ease and urine, and return it and take back that second according to the manner in which one mixes the medicine at the beginning, and then return to the first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And make them do this for seven days or surround those with, because that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a piece of wool and thread a hemp thread through the trachea of it a tube; and insert the whole bladder into the fundament, and blow into the tube with virtue so that the bladder is inflated within the fundament, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with liquid and stopped for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the penis of man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and reduction of it that liquid which we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is written is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which few understand, mainly to whom some study and use and intend my free speech; because that fracture means for you in the major preparations of the way of writing in the restoration and in the strictness of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	More in the wound of the man when it is pierced, take a poultice of water, and put the wound in it; and return your hand over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and return it be left alone for three days or around them, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fracture of the bones when it is caused by a wound.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the one to whom a fracture due to a wound happens, and especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or of the arm, or similar to that, which you consider and make incisions in the same manner as the conditions of surgery require, as we have said before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound flows with blood, then it is necessary that you make an incision for retention of it in such a way that you dust over it with powdered dragant, if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on the same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if a hot abscess occurs, then leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day at all, because you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone protrudes from the wound, then it is necessary that you reduce and set it with your hands for ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not according to your preparation and the patient's condition, then you reduce it with your hands using a device; this device is made of iron, its length is seven or eight fingers and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this reason, the doctor needs to take three or four of them depending on the quantity indicated by the treatment of each type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round, and let it be in minimal thickness so that it is not doubled over the compression during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it be with sharp extremities where the edges are smooth; and let its thickness be tending to coarse, and of its width extending into the partitions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means little spade or small chisel.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the extremity of the sharp one is elevated above the extremity of the bone that protrudes.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Insert a probe into the opening so that the bone returns, and let it be treated with some ointment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore make an effort to treat the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the fractured extremity is subtle, and does not take the ointment well, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the ointment has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone to what we have recommended, then insert it with what is convenient for him of the insertions that we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whichever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then scratch what remains in the bone of roughness and of sparse scratches.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and with the reduction the patient finds vehement pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you conferred with the patient previously.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When the restoration that you do to the bone is completed, then submerge a cloth in white vinegar, and specifically if it is in summer, and do not put anything on the wound such as wax or another cause in which there is oil, so that it does not induce pus and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer steel in the hour of the complement of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that scar tissue forms from the outer layers and uses bandages according to the quantity of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And beware with all caution that you do not touch the wound to the fracture, because many times it has been seen that foolish doctors cause death or corrosive illness, except for being sane.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the bone's structure loosens, becomes soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you suspect those accidents worse than which we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then do not put steel on it, but rather make a dressing of durable cloths in place of steel and apply it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when for one or two days the wound begins to suppurate, and pus has formed in it, then remove the cloth that you had put on it with vinegar, and administer warm poultices, using those of our custom, which is to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar things.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is suitable for you to dress the limb and consider the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it is good that the member be prepared in such a way that pus can run from it to the lower parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound does not heal after many days, and it is neither consolidated nor separated from the arm, then you should know that this is a sign of small ulcers that will appear on the skin because the wound has become infected.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those ulcers, those that are separated will remain and be extracted, those that do not separate from the flesh will cause the member to swell and create pain, you must make an incision in them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if there appears to the wound pus or ichor, it is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply one of those remedies that is suitable for it from the treatment of which the aforementioned narration is preceded in the following chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in this case, you should place your sermon and present your wisdom: when the bone is fractured, apply it to the member like the bone of the thigh and of the hip and similar to those of the large members, and do not suppose that there will be an attraction of it, nor its extraction, because many times death occurs due to this; having removed the thing that presses, hold firmly for twenty days or thirty; then treat the wound if it is visible to you, and if not, let it be.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter twenty.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Excessive movement causes this swelling in the vicinity of a healing fracture, and especially when it is near the joints, and it is worsened by the shape of the limb; and therefore it is prohibited to let the limb perform its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have a contracting effect, such as aloes, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar ones; take some or all of these, and mix them with six-year-old wine, or with white alum, or with sour vinegar, and apply this to the swelling in a poultice, and constrict it firmly with a good bandage.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the poultice on for several days without removing it; and then remove it and apply another one, until the swelling has subsided; or spread a layer of lead plaster on it, because lead has the property of reducing all inflammation in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a stone and is hardened, then it's necessary to provoke an abscess, and then cut it open through the upper part of the limb, and remove the excess and prominent parts, or treat it with some corrosive remedies until it subsides; and cure it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of restoration of fracture when it is restored and then the thin member and the bruise are reduced according to its own nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the thin member and bruise are reduced, this is not done except for several reasons: among which one is the excessive solution of the ligament and the loosening of what was previously bound; or due to an excess of tightness of the ligaments through which nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the member; or due to an excess of superfluous swelling; or a movement that is not at its proper time; or lack of blood in the body of the patient and weakness of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of this is to give food to the patient and to make their heart tender so that blood may be multiplied in them; and administer a bath; and apply warm and soothing treatments on them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then apply a plaster on the member, so that the plaster may draw to it much nourishment, or continue a swelling of warm water, until nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and the operation of them is prohibited from what is suitable.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member is restored to its proper place after injury or fracture, and swelling and nodulation occur at the broken and bent bone, it is because of this that the shape of the member becomes deformed, but even though the member does not prohibit its natural operation, however it is not suitable that you should heed the words of one who claims that the member will never function normally again after a new fracture.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our land; and this operation is very shameful, inducing great fear, the signal of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If the stiffness and nodulation are recent, then it is fitting that they be wrapped in warm water in which have been cooked softening herbs, such as leaves of altea and roots of it, and mallow, and similar things; and let a plaster of mollifying plaster be made for it, such as diacalabon well made; or that the mucilage of the root of altea be taken and mixed with gum of walnut or with oil of cypress, and applied to it; or that fat figs be crushed with females of colomb, and similar things of the medicines which are called by name consolidating.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by continuous friction with a light touch on the most humid areas, and movement of the member should be administered in all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	When the tortuosity has already advanced and is made strong and converted into stone and necessity calls for treatment with iron, then it is necessary that the worst of the abscess be cut out and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and let what is superfluous in the node of that member be cut away with subtle incisions, and facility be administered in that solicited and studied area.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech about dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some joint from its proper place, by which movement is hindered, and the shape of the member is distorted, and brings to the patient pains and great lesions.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to perforate as soon as possible so that it can be reduced, and do not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the area becomes infected and strong with what is made, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is not advisable to touch or stretch during the time of infection, because many times it brings about spasms and painful sores.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, then it is necessary that you apply the flannel to the patient's body, and let it be left on until the infection subsides; and let the member be wrapped in warm water and oil, and then let it be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	Every member should be treated with that which memory will bring back to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated and do not articulate; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are returned to their places with little movement, and slightly loosened; or they are completely dislocated and reduced, until they are loosened at the joint, so that the saliva of the patient flows and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	More often when the dislocation of it is slight, then in major conditions it returns by itself for a slight cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and complicated, then it is necessary that reduction of it be administered promptly, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister should hold the head of the patient, and the doctor insert his fingers of one hand in the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both hands together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of their hands be outside with which they hold; and command the patient to cease moving his jaws and loosen them from each part; and the doctor should take hold of the jaw and pull it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, especially when both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until the reduction of both is done easily and the reduction of both is not delayed, thus as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they are returned and still swollen, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, then place on those swellings a poultice of wax and cerate, and make it with wax and mixed oil; and apply it with ease and soft bindings.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be held between two pillows, so that they do not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything; having their food nearby, forbid them from eating lion, until when the pains are lessened and the jaws are gnashed, then let them eat what they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth until after eating and drinking and digestion, until the jaw is gnashed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any hour and not converted to their proper place, then give bitter medicines and constant soda, and if the patient's stomach is upset, and they vomit and have pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that, then know that it is a loss; and many times death occurs to the one to whom this condition happens in X days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The shoulder is not dislocated from the part that is joined to the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back with two pillows and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then bind the area with your palm with strong binding, so that it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then put a plaster on that place and dust it and sprinkle it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which is joined to the body and continues with it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and put in place according to what we have said and according to what is appropriate.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then put a plaster on that place, and dust, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to quietness and to rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter twenty-six.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in one way, but rather in three manners, of which one is dislocation at the top of the tendon to the top of the joints.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the bottom of the muscle, and this is done with tension; and it is not dislocated at the back parts for the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts because of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and pushed out at the bottom parts of the tendon, and mostly in those where the flesh is weak, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are many muscles, it is pushed out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And for this reason some men suffer from percussion or blow, and the muscle of it is affected by a hot cauterization, and it is treated with that which was already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, I advise you to apply this within the limits of your knowledge, and then proceed with caution in the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is at the bottom parts of the tendon; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find among them manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle a hollow and at the bottom of the tendon of the head of the muscle like a tube, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor can they move it for any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the foot or ankle is dislocated, then you will obviously notice a visible deformation, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, a lighter reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is an infant.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of it to the divided parts; and then places the tied pouices on the thigh of it, and raises the joint with strength in its own place, and the minister raises the hand of it, and extends it in its; and then holds it until it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if because of what we have said it does not return, and thus the dislocation persists for many days, then it is advisable that the patient be bathed in warm water and administered a softening enema that moistens and loosens, as if one were to cook turnip, and fenugreek, and melillot in water, and have it administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and held in place by the thigh of a servant in wait of a ladder that is between looseness and strictness, and then the doctor places his heel on the sphere, and raises the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so it is not mixed with the divided parts, and another servant holds the head of the patient, so it is not mixed with the divided parts, until it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return that second segment in this manner: make sure a man is present who is taller than the patient, and let him be on the side of that rib, and insert his muscle under the patient's buttocks and lift the patient's buttocks to the divisions above so that the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the divisions below the patient's belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lightweight, it is good that someone else holds them, so that another cause is suspended, for which is heavy, because the dislocation returns immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is returned immediately in another manner: make sure a long stick is placed on the ground, the end of which is rounded in shape, like a pillow, not too big or too small, and place it under the patient; then place them on top of the stick's head, so that the patient stands according to the length of the stick, and extend their hand to the divisions below the other part; and let their body be extended on the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult by all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: make sure you take a stick whose length is two arms and width is four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted to the size of the thigh according to this shape:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place on the head a dressing of warm cloths so that the patient does not get a chill.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then let the patient's bed be raised, and let the hand or arm be extended over the chest between the ribs, and let the body be wrapped around the hips and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then let the arm be placed on a ladder according to its width, and the hand be extended between the ribs, and the other limb be suspended from the other side, so that the joint is in a balanced position.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of it is completed according to each manner that is possible for you, then take a sufficient amount of flax seed and wool of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of mulberry and white of egg on all the muscle, in such a way that it is wrapped around, and then bind the bed tightly with a decent strap; and the ligament be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand of it be tied to the neck of it, and be left so, and not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is good if the food of the patient is sparse, until the member is comforted, for it is easier for their healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given in large quantities and a exercise of movement should be practiced; and so if it is stopped and not softened, it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated with excessive moisture that occurs to it or for another cause, then it is advisable that a cautery with three punctures be administered there, as it is said in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if it is done and after seven days the ligament and the joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and the bandage are removed from it with some moisture, and it is not strengthened and can't hold and can't raise that arm to the divisions above, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already injured or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation of that which is done to the foot and the thigh or the back parts, the reduction is made with a push and extension with the hands until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let another bandage be administered to it, and cure it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there occurs to it the heaviness of healing in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use warm baths with moisture until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You should know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and in the same way returns with difficulty; and this one is dislocated in all parts, and mainly in the front part before the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when you put your hands on the victim or touch according to whatever figure is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, it is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch that muscle with the shoulder.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to treat the hip, and reduce the dislocation as much as possible before it comes to a critical point, because if it reaches the critical point, the reduction of it is difficult, and many times it does not heal completely; and mainly when it affects the back parts, because this one is worse than all other types of dislocations, and of major pain, and many times death occurs from it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of the patient should be extended to both sides, and their arm should be spread out, and the hands of the doctor should be on the hip and on the back of the patient, and they press the joint with the fingers of their hands together, or with the heel of their palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	More often if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus that you double your hand with their hand, while striking the heel with the bottom of their palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer a vehement extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants stretch the arm, and hold that joint with two assistants so that it is not moved during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then wrap the arm from one end to the other, since it is enveloped in double-wound long cloth over their hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, anoint that with some oil so that it has those causes which help in lubricity of the joint with ease; and then smear the joint with strong ointment while it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And then the reduction of it being placed on that plaster in which is stipulated and exception with album of egg, and be restrained with strict bandage, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it will be dissolved; and thus if the joint is formed in its own place, then you undo the bandage of it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint is not strengthened, then apply the plaster and bandage, and leave that on for several days until it is reinforced; and then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens that the gravity affects him, then with the reduction of the joint and its being in movement, apply humidification in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until he is relieved; or place a poultice on the affected joint, which is called a warm poultice; and then tie it, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put him in a bath; and when he sweats, then rub the joint with tempered friction, and apply on it an ointment, which is called a Ronhon, one time, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in a warm bath, until he is cleaned.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place on that wound of the cow a humid and scratched poultice with butter and strong over it; and do this several times, because it is humid and reduces to its condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In the case of a dislocated shoulder, the reduction of the dislocation is easier, and on the contrary, it is more difficult for other joints, but it is essential to have speed in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, provided that the area is not infected or that an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant extends their arm, and the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it in until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But it is also necessary to consider if the palm has been dislocated towards the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is in front of the hand, then the position of that hand should be intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand can act on the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns to its place quickly, that's good; and if not, then force that arm with a plaster cast, putting pressure on the abscess and relieving it; and do not repeat this, because if not, there will be no relief nor power over the reduction of it, since the days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	We prepare the joint according to its curvature; and we do not apply any cause to the patient's harm, but rather the hand is softened and cannot hold any cause; then we know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then it is not a problem for them except that it should be strengthened with a cautery near the wound and reinforce their confidence by applying some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Thus when the sickness is returned, then let it rest on the plaster that we have recommended, and let it be loose and strengthened for several days; and then let it be unbound and let it rest and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	We see that the movement of it is stopped and if any heaviness occurs in it, then we apply warm water and friction with some clothing, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of displacement of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some bandages are used to dislocate the fingers entirely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger is displaced among those at the palm or the belly of the hand, then hold the finger and press the displacement with the thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that one from the part to which it is displaced, and let it rest for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then lift that one and stretch the one that should be straightened in that diseased joint.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night comes, lay him in that position and do not cease to loosen it in the day and exercise with movement, and lay him at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similarly to this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and lay it in that same place and do the same thing as the first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do the same to this when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter thirty.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When there occurs to some of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complicated dislocation, and many vertebrae are displaced from their place, then in that case there is no cure, for death follows the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the patient is outside of their will, and they cannot retain it; and many members of theirs are weakened, such as some limbs or two legs or two arms, or one of those; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for many are displaced and many are made to lose control of those in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that one is already improved in the parts behind and is called recovery or health.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	More, the cure of it is that then you consider if the recovery happens due to purification, because then in that there is no cure nor is total healing of it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which comes from accident or percussion or similar to these, the Ancients have already said the manners of cure with prolix speech, from which the most returns to profit; but I have already abbreviated it for the sake of avoiding too much of it, due to its proximity to my intention, to which I have explained and formulated from diverse instruments, with which I will show and expound.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in recovery which happens from the front part of the chest, there is neither cure nor healing of it; and similarly in that which is done on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, none are cured except the one that happens on the back properly with what I have recommended.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face on a low bench near a wall, and should be stretched with a soft cloth so that the chest of theirs is not constricted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a wooden stick on the ground at the end of the bed around the patient's head, and another stick in the air under their feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	One minister holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that method.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the patient's head and tie the first bandage tightly; and stretch the end of the bandage to the stick which is near the patient's head, and tie it on them; and then tie the other bandage around their hips and their thighs; and adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick which is near their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then each minister stretches the bandage to the part of the stick, and let the two sticks and the bandages in their respective places where they are fixed, but however not tied as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns to its place, or places on that one table, and then adjusts on the table the patient's feet until they return to their place.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return to its place by this method, then take a table whose width or length is in the air about three arms, and hollow out in the part of which we have said is near the patient a place where the end of the table enters.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then put a hand on the patient's back, the doctor puts their feet on the other extremity, and tightens so that the spine is constricted and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, take the turn which is wound on the hand; and it is that you make on the ground two posts of the patient's feet, with a length of an arm, and two posts at the back of their feet also of the same length; and let there be a space between each post of one palm, and already made in each post a hole through which the turn passes, and each post is firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there be a wooden post in which the turn is made, and wound through the two holes of the two posts.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And on the extremity of it there is a hole in which the post is formed, the length of which is a palm where it is wound; and on the two other posts is something similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligaments that you have tied on the chest of the patient in the hole which is at the head of it, and the ligaments that you have tied on its thighs in the turn which is at their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn must have a minister who will turn the turn with their hand, and the doctor will anoint the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the shape of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then when the spine is returned to its place, and the area is anointed, then take a plaster made with egg whites, and apply it; and put it on the plaster of the table from which the width should be three fingers or around that, and the length should be the quantity that takes the space of the swelling, and on the part of the spine apply it.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then let it be tied with a bandage as we have said, and use on the patient a subtle nourishment so that they may be healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains some weakness in the area at the end of the healing, then take medicines that soften and lubricate for administration on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already administered in that place is a plaster of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some times it happens that there is an emergency in the back of the spine, and it is thought that it is due to dislocation; and it is that bone for which we have already warned you, so that no absorption should be made with this medicine, because if you do, it will bring about your death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter twenty-one.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	It is known that the joint of the hip and the junction of the muscle do not just cause dislocation, but rather only the displacement, and does not happen to those what happens to other joints with little movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, that is, it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the rear parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front parts or to the rear parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation to the inner parts is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy side to the sick one, it is longer and the knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the sick leg cannot bend upwards without lifting the hip, and this is the place where the hip bone is separated from its joint, because the head of the thigh bone has already come out of its socket.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of that one to whom dislocation happens to the outer parts is that its symptoms are contrary to this dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	If there is dislocation in the patient's jaw due to an accident, then it expands their own leg according to the injury, but especially does not double the pain that is in the tooth, and if it perforates to the nostril and cannot be retained at the front teeth; and the urine of theirs is retained and their throat is abscessed, and you should ambulate them on the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	If there is dislocation in the patient's jaw at the back teeth, then it does not expand the tooth, nor can it double the front tooth that doubles the throat, and their leg is shorter than the other, and the throat is softened, and the head of the thigh is turned to that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is what you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that has already been antiquated with them having that applied treatment, and you administer reduction according to their disposition, then it is not entirely in that cure; and therefore it does not matter that a prognosis be made in that case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should reduce it to what will return the joint and extend it to the inner and outer parts, and move it to the right and left, because it strongly returns and does not indicate another cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Mays, if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg of the patient from the affected part, or with their hands, or with a bandage which is tied over the knee; and another minister extends the hand of that one in such a way that they place their hands under the testicles of the patient; and place a strong bandage over the joint of the thigh, and hold another minister to hold the extremity of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is an extension of the patient or of the affected part to the ankle joint, or from the back part to the buttocks area.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if this extension is of all those things in a way that the patient is elevated with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is a common species to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary to apply a specific treatment that I will speak of regarding its own cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back; and place bandages over the joint of the thigh in that location which is between the head of the thigh and the place where the ankle is; and then extend the bandage from the part of the ankle to the furthest part of the buttocks.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another strong minister takes the patient's arms, and presses the thick part of the thigh where the pain is, extending it to the affected parts with vigorous extension, so that it returns to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of minor cure on which the member is reduced more than the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you are excused from this and do not obey the entrance to this species of cure at all, then it is good that both feet of the patient be bound together with a strong, light bandage, above both the ankles and both the toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each one be four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient is suspended over the head of the stool, and it is in the mud; and let the length from the ground be the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to bend the head of the thigh, and let another youth be suspended with the patient, and the other youth bending the thigh with strength, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in proper reduction, when there is dislocation of the affected part, it is good that the patient put a poultice as we have recommended in the aforementioned gelbozitat; and let the bandage be tightened over the patient's leg properly and over their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two pads, one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; and then place adjusted pads on the middle of the poultice applied with humid cloths wrapped around it, so that the patient is not damaged by the pad being between their thighs, for which you must extend the edges to the divided parts so that they are not attracted.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then let each assistant extend to their own part, and the doctor with his hand guide the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if it is reversed, it will be greatly beneficial; and if not, place it diligently on that spot and do as we have said regarding the application of a poultice for its reduction.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	It is better that the patient lies on their side, which is most comfortable for them.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, it is better that the leg be extended gently, and it is according to this narrative about poultices; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the patient's shoulder, and then cuts with the other hand, and with this cutting places the extended part to the front part at the front of the jaw.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, it is not good that the patient's legs be extended, and it is elevated from the ground; rather it is better that it be placed on a hard surface, just as it is better if their hip is dislocated to the front parts, according to what we have said about placing them on two hips; and it is placed on its face and the ligaments are extended, as we have said, there is no error.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is advisable that compression be administered on the table over the area where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and that is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those limbs and the patient stretches their own leg and expands those six excuses, then you know that the member as it should be is returned — and then you adjust the two hips and apply a plaster cast and stretch with a bandage so that the width is not hindered in any of the divisions; and have the patient rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then remove the bandage and the plaster cast, and compare one hip to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those limbs in alignment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and allow the patient to walk.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that, and stretch it according to your first instruction, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then remove that, and have them delay walking on it for some days, until it is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter twelve.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the cure of displacement of the tooth.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The tooth is displaced in three ways, for it is displaced to the front parts, and to the rear parts, and to the upper parts more than to the lower parts; and to the adjacent parts it is not displaced.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of displacement of it is that you command the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you will know that the tooth is displaced.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all its kinds is that you make the patient stand straight, and also that they extend their leg if possible; place their two hands on the face, and hold their foot between the two hands; and then make them press the tooth with their palms, and hold those between the teeth strongly over the tooth, and another assistant makes them extend their foot until the tooth returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction of it is that the leg sticks to the thigh with lightness without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a plaster and make the leg stick to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not allow the patient to walk for several days, until they are healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer a strong extension with bandages in the cure of the hip as previously mentioned narration.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter thirty-three.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes is injured by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of it is made at the inner or outer parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of it is that the ankle is swollen, proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of the sprain of it is of gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with ease, with bandages, and kept still until it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to the injury, it is necessary that you make the patient stand upright, and have a strong and able assistant at the back of the patient in the middle location of it.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then put your right hand on the uppermost part of the foot, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then put the foot on your right hand, and hold it with your left for two supports, and stretch it with your left; and press the sole of the foot against your right leg near the thigh's work.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And make two supports as we have described.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the sole of the foot to the leg for the third support, and you are at the calf.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Then if it returns in one support or in two according to this method, and if you bend the foot backwards, it's good; and if not, then repeat the operation on the other side, for that which returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction of the limb to what we have recommended is prohibited for you, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth firmly held on the ground, and which goes between their thighs, and you have wrapped around them with a sheet so that it doesn't hurt the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then one minister holds their thighs, and another minister stretches the foot with their hands or with a bandage that lies on the heel of the foot; and each minister resists against the stretching of their part, and the piece of cloth is stretched between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the parts above their extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor should adjust the dislocation with the healthy thighs, and another assistant should hold the sound hip to the patient's sides, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction is declared to you, then pause to apply a plaster and strongly tighten that limb with a bandage, and tie the foot to the leg with a bandage.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware that you protect yourself from the nerves which are behind the heel, so that the bandage on it is not violent and does not press too strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it like that for two days or for three; and if the bandage is loosened, tighten it again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then undo it on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is forgotten to put in that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted on it, and then it does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if a hot abscess occurs to it, then beware that you administer in the reduction of it what we previously mentioned, in another place of treatment and of application, until it is reduced.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter Four.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is advisable that one who is dislocated should be treated with little extension of the limb; and this which is not difficult, is easier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	More often if the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then it is advisable to make the patient put their foot on the ground or on a table, and let them stand still as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then put your foot on the ground, and place the patient's foot on what seems to be the lowest point of the joints, and then press with your foot on theirs in a downward motion so that it returns, and you will see that it has been properly realigned and does not appear out of place.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the belly of their foot on a board that encloses the whole foot, which has two ends, and tighten it with a structure that is decent and firm for three days; and then undo it and make them rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter Thirty-Five.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the species of dislocation that are made with a wound or with a fracture or with whatever happens at the same time.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When accidents occur due to those things, and you perforate in the treatment of it and in the restoration of them, many witnessed successes follow, but death often occurs.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for that it is not proper to presume on the treatment of it, except for one who is wise in the art, with long usage, merciful and pitied, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses in the commencement of medicines that cause abscesses to heal solely, and lifts the sickness to divine judgment, but rather to the one for whom you hope for salvation from loss, and from the illness alleviation, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore exert yourself so much to make the reduction in the commencement of the cause, provided that an abscess does not come to a head or burst.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And therefore if the member returns as we wish, then administer treatment which will cause the abscess to heal and cure the wound with what is convenient for it from the ointments of dried plasters.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if it is a dislocation with a fracture and accidents occur in the separated bones, then you perforate their joint, and do to it what we have said about simple illnesses of this type that are treated in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and shun the intestine's path according to your ability in the ways of fear as my preaching has preceded you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your body truly those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus may the words of Albucasim be perfected by the words which God will bless.
Amen.	Amen is a direct translation, as
